**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



g^lfl:^:^i^J^^lf/lJJ^i^N^^ g^^TS^,^^ 



IS 10011 (1981) 
Dentistry] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



Resin-based Dental Filling Materials [MHD 



i&^^f f /lA^sh^^JS^ rsJ^a^TTTF^ 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangarara Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



ISHQDII-Ifll 

( Reaffirmed 1998) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

RESIN-BASED DENTAL FILLING MATERIALS 



UDC 616-314 - 069*27 - 74 : 678 586 




Prif# 



O Copyrighl 19R2 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

iAASAK BBAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAPAR MAHU 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 10011 > 1981 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
RESIN-BASED DENTAL FILLING MATERIALS 

Dental Materials Sectional Committee, CDC 52 



Chairman 

Dr N. K. Agrawal 
Dental College & Hospital, Lucknow 

Members Representing 

Dr B. B. Dutta Dr R. Ahmed Dental College & Hospital, Calcutta 

Shri F. R. Gulmohamed Dental Products of India Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. R. Sethna ( Alternate ) 
Dr S, N. Iyer Johnson & Johnson Ltd^ Bombay 

Shri G. V. Bhandari ( Alternate ) 
Dr Pradip Jayna Indian Dental Association, Madras 

Am Cdre p. C. Kochhar Ministry of Defence ( DGAFMS ) 

Brig S. N. Lutiira ( Alternate ) 
SilRT A. V. KoTHARi Polytners Corporation of Gujarat Ltd, Vadodara 

Dr R. S. Parmar ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. K. Mandal Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri R. D. Mathur Bharat Dental & Medical Supply Co, Lucknow 

Shri A. B. Mathur ( Alternate ) 
Dr Fali S. Mehta Tata Institute of Fundamental Research. Bombay 

Shri R. G. Nandwana Kalabhai Karson & Sons, Bombay 

Shri S. A. Sheikh ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. M. Rawal Indo-Ceylon Dental & Surgical Co Ltd, Madras 

DrJ. L.Sethi Drjagdish Lai Sethi, Delhi 

Shri Ashok Sethi ( Alternate 1 ) 

Shri Vinod Sethi ( Alternate TI ) 
Dr G. B. Siiankwalkar Government Dental College & Hospital, Bombay 

Dr V. K. Shourie Occulsion Products, Thane 

Dr ( Mrs ) A. Shourie ( Alternate ) 
Dr ( Smt ) Daya V. Singhat. Lady Hardinge Medical College & S. K. Hospital, 

New Delhi 
Dr Balraj Sur Dr Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, New Delhi 

Dr S. T. Talim Nair Hospital Dental College, Bombay 

Dr D. R. SiiAHANi ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1982 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by iuiy means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10011 - 1981 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 

Dr p. p. Thukral 
Dk Hari Bhagwan, 
Director ( Chem ) 



Representing 

Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Secretary 

Simi S. K. Mathur 
Deputy Director ( Ghem ), 1ST 



Filling Materials and Allied Products Subcommittee, CDC 52 : 1 

Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi 



Convener 
Dr p. p. Thukkai. 



Members 
Dr N. K. Agrawai, 

Shri p. R. Gulmohamed 

SiiRi S. R. Skthna ( Alternate ) 
Dr B. Goverdhan IIegde 
Dr B. p. Rajan 
Dr G, L. Subharwal 
Dr V. Subramanian 



In personal capacity ( Dental College &' Hospital, 

Lucknow ) 
Dental Products of India Ltd, Bombay 

Government Dental College, Bangalore 
Madras Dental College, Madras 
Safdarjang Hospital, New Delhi 

Directorate of Medical Education and Research 
( Government of Maharashtra ), Bombay 



IS : 10011 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
RESIN-BASED DENTAL FILLING MATERIALS 



0. FOREWORD 

0,1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 30 November 1981, after the draft finalized by the Dental Materials 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 

0.2 Resin-based dental filling materials are used for restoration of teeth. 
However, precise definition of a composite filling material is yet to be 
agreed upon. The title and scope of this standard are, therefore, such as 
not to exclude any resin-based material, but include resin-based composite 
type of filling materials, 

0.3 This standard is based on ISO 4049-1978 Resin-based dental filling 
materials, prepared by the International Organization for Standardization 

(ISO). 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the fmal value, observed or calculated, expressing 
the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with the 
IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the requirem.ents and the methods of sampling 
and test for resin-based dental filling materials presented in a form suitable 
for both mechanical and hand mixing, and intended for use as direct 
dental restorations in the oral cavity. 

2, REQUIREMENTS 

2.1 Material — When treated in accordance with the manufacturer's 
instructions, the material shall set to a condition suitable for its intended 
dental use {see also 2.4). 



*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised). 

3 



IS : 10011 - 1981 

2.2 Colouring Matter — If the material is supplied in pre-coloured 
shades, then each shade shall be capable of satisfying the requirements 
specified in the standard. In the event of the material being suppHed for 
tinting or blending to the user's prescription, the test requirements shall 
apply both when the maximum recommended proportion of tinter or 
blender is used and with the base material by itself ( see also 2.8 ). 

2.3 Working Time — The working time from the com.m^encement of 
mixing to the commencement of setting, when determined as prescribed 
in A-2, shall be not less than the mixing time plus 60 s. 

2.4 Setting Time — The setting time measured from the commencement 
of mixing, when determined as prescribed in A-3, shall be not more than 
8 min. 

2.5 Transverse Strength — The transverse strength of the set material, 
when determined as prescribed in A-4, shall be not less than 50 MPa. 

2.6 Shade — Tlic colour of the set material shall closely match the manu- 
facturer's shade guide. If a shade guide is not supplied by the manufacturer, 
samples from two further batches shall be taken for comparison purposes. 

2.7 Toxicity — The mixed material, when used in accordance with the 
manufacturer's instructions, shall neither cause prolonged damage to 
oral tissues nor have any adverse systemic effect. 

2.8 Colour Stability 

2.8.1 Heat — The colour of the set material shall not show more than 
a sHght change after 24 h, when tested as prescribed in A-5.1. 

2.8.2 Light — The colour of the set material shall not show more than 
a slight change after 24 h, when tested as prescribed in A-5.2. 

2.9 Fillers — Resin-based materials may or may not contain fillers. 
Those with 50 percent or more by mass of jfiller shall be described as compo- 
site. The filler content shall be determined by the method prescribed in A-6. 

3. PACKING AND MARKING 

3,1 Packing — The material shall be packed in securely closed containers 
that will not contaminate nor be affected under normal conditions of 
transport, storage and handling. 



IS : 10011 - 1981 

3.2 Marking — Each package shall be legibly and indelibly marked with 
the following information: 

a) Name of the material, and composite, if applicable; 

b) Shade; 

c) Name of the manufacturer and or his recognized trade-mark, if any ; 

d) Net mass; 

e) Date of mam.ifacture and expiry date; and 

f) Batch number, 

3.3 Manufacturer's Instructions — Detailed instructions shall accom- 
pany each individual pack of material and shall include the following 
details : 

a) Information of the proportioning of components and method of 
mixing, including, if relevant, ambient conditions under which 
it should be carried out; 

b) Information on the manipulation (see Note ) and setting time of 
the material^ including an indication of Uvc time when a matrix 
may be removed, if this differs from the setting time ; 

c) Any special precautions regarding manipulation of the material, 
including, if relevant, the maximum proportion of tinters or blenders 
which m.ay be used without detrim.ent to the physical properties; 

d) Information on the need to use a base/liner or other recommended 
protective measures if the material can cause pulpal irritations; 

e) Recom.m.ended instructions for finishing; and 

f ) Recommended conditions for storage ( need for refrigeration ) and 
shelf life under the conditions of storage. 

Note — The term 'manipulation time' is intended to refer to the time the manu- 
facturer cJamis IS available ibr handling and placement of his particular product. 
This may well be different from the minimum Vorking time'. 

4. SAMPLING 

4.1 The method of drawing representative samples of the m.aterial and 
the criteria for conformity of the material to the requirements of this specifi- 
cation shall be as prescribed in Appendix B. 

5 



IS : 10011 - 1981 

APPENDIX A 

(Clauses 2.3, 2,4, 2.5, 2,8.1,2.8.2 and 2.9) 

METHODS OF TEST FOR RESIN-BASED DENTAL 
FILLING MATERIALS 

A-L GENERAL 

A-1.1 Quality of Reagents — Unless specified otherwise, pure chemicals 
and distilled water (see IS : 1070-1977* ) shall be employed in tests. 

Note — *Pure chemicals' shall mean chemicals that do not contain inpurities 
which afi'ect the results ol" analysis. 

A-1.2 Ambient Conditions — Unless stated otherwisCj all test specimens 
shall be prepared and tested at 27+ PC The relative humidity shall be 
controlled to ensure that it remains greater than 30 percent at all times. 

A-1,3 Mixing — The material shall be mixed in accordance with the 
manufacturer's instructions, using only the amount necessary to carry out 
the relevant test. 

A-2. WORKING TIME 

A-2.1 Apparatus 

A-2.L1 Oscillating Rheometer — It records graphically or instrumentally 
the viscosity changes in the setting material. A suitable instrument which 
comprises the following features is shown in Fig, 1 . 

The main housing ( ^ ) is mounted and can rotate in a ball-race 
{B), which has very little friction. The lower platten ( C) is held 
in the main housing by two grub screws {D) and a knurled screw 
( £)j with upper platten ( M ) in position on its guide, a distance 
of 1 mm above. The main housing and the lower platten are driven 
in an oscillatory motion by means of a 10 min"' electric motor 
attached to an eccentric wheel {F) which is connected to arm ( G ) 
by means of two balanced and tensioned coil springs (H). The 
maximum rotary movement of arm ( G), when no material is on 
the platten, is P 12' ±2'. This rotary movement is measured by 
means of a transducer (J\f)y the output from which is fed either 
to a centre-zero microammeter or to a suitable automatic recording 
apparatus. The instrument is checked by attaching a fine nylon 
thread to a hook (J). A-10'2 g mass is attached to the other end 
of the thread, which passes over a polytetrafluoroethylene ( PTFE ) 
rod. Hence, a force of O'l N is applied at right angles to arm ( G ) 



*i 



Specification for water for general laboratory use ( second revision ). 

6 



IS : 10011 - 1981 



at point ( J ) which is 54 mm from the centre of platten ( C ). This 
is equivalent to a torque of 5*4 N. mm. When this cahbration torque 
is appHed, screws ( K ) and ( L ) are so adjusted that the deflection 
on the microammeter is the same as the deflection obtained when 
the instrument is running with no material on the platten. 



(gK^ 





WATER OungT 

WATER IfJLET 



FILLING 
MATERIAL 



r^^ Ar"® 




Fig. 1 Oscillating Rheometer for Determination of 
Working Time anjd Setting Time 



IS : 10011 - 1981 

A-2.2 Procedure — Mix the test material in accordance with the manu- 
facturer's instructions. Start timing from the commencement of mixing. 
Place the mixed material on platten ( C ) and lower the upper platten ( M ) 
on its guide and screw into position 20s after the end of mixing. Maintain 
the water circulating through patten (M) at 27+ PC. Take readings, 
one every 6s, on one side of the meter and plot these values against time. 
Alternatively J the transducer output may be fed into a suitable automatic 
recording apparatus and a continuous trace of variation of viscosity with 
time may be obtained ( as shown in Fig. 2 ) . 




2A TRACE FOR VERIFICATION OF MINIMUM WORKING TIME 




PORTION OF TRACE 
INDICATINS SETTING 
TIME 



2B TRACE FOR DETERMINATION OF SETTING TIME 
Fig. 2 Traces of Viscosity as a Function of Time 



8 



IS : 10011 - 1981 

A-2.3 Calculation — Measure the trace 40s after commencing recording 
( 1 min after the end of mixing ), when it shall be not less than 95 percent 
of the original width. 

A-3. SETTING TIME 

A-3.1 Apparatus — Same as specified in A-2.1. 

A-3.2 Procedure — Repeat the procedure specified in A-2.2 using water 
at 37+ PC circulating through plattcn (M). 

A-3,3 Calculation^ — From the curve obtained (see Fig. 2 ), record the 
setting time as the time at which the curve flattens out to the final straight 
portion. Alternatively, the setting time may be recorded as the time at 
which the curve deviates from its final straight portion. 

A-4, TRANSVERSE STRENGTH 

A-4.1 Apparatus 

A-4.1.1 Metal Mould — PTFE* lined, for preparation of a specimen 
25±2 X2±0-1 X 2 + 0-1 mm. A suitable mould is illustrated in Fig. 3. 




Fig, 3 Mould for Preparation of Test Specimen 

A-4.1.2 Two Plates — of or lined with PTFE or other suitable material, 
approximately 25 x 25 mm. 

A-4.1.3 Small Clamp 

A-4.1.4 Suitable Testing Apparatus — with jig for application of loadinpj 
in the manner specified in A-4.3. The jig consists essentially of two rods 
( 2 mm diameter ) mounted parallel with 20 mm between centres, and a 
third rod ( 2 mm diameter ) between and parallel to the other two, so that 
the three rods in combination can be used to give a three-point loading 
to the specimen. 



*PTFE tape of thickness 0*0:> to 0'20 mm is suitable 



IS : 10011 - 1981 

A-4.2 Preparation of Test Specimen — Mix the material according 
to the manufacturer's instructions and immediately place in the mould 
situated on a PTFE plate. Place the second PTFE plate on top of the 
mould and gently apply pressure by means of the clamp, thus exuding 
excess material from the mould. Three minutes after the commencement 
of mixing, place the assembly in a water bath maintained at S^G. Fifteen 
minutes after the commencement of mixing, remove the clamp and separate 
the mould. Store the specimen in water at S^C. 

A-4.3 Procedure — Twenty-three hours after the commencement of 
mixing, transfer the specimens to a second bath of water, at 27±1°G. 
Fifty minutes later, remove the specimen, wipe dry and place in the trans- 
verse testing jig in the testing apparatus. Twenty-lour hours after the 
commencement of mixing, apply a load to the specimen at O* 75 + 0*25 mm/ 
min cross head speed, or at 50+16 N/min if an incremental loading appara- 
tus is used. 

A-4-4 Calculation — The transverse strength A is given, in newtons 
per square millimetre ( megapascals ), by the formula : 

3FI 

^ = 2 Inl^ 

where 

F = maximum force in newtons exerted on the specimen, 

/ = distance in mm between the supports ( correct to 0-01 mm ), 

b = breadth in mm of the specimen measured immediately prior 

to testing ( correct to 0*01 mm ), and 
(I ^ depth in mm of the specimen measured immediately prior 
to testing (correct to O'Olmm). 

Calculate the mean of three or more values from a total of five deter- 
minations, and report the result to three significant figures. Discard any 
value for individual specimens which fall more than 15 percent below the 
mean of the five, and report the mean of the remaining values. Repeat 
the whole test if more than two of the specimens have to be discarded. 

A-5. COLOUR STABILITY 

A-5.1 Heat 

A-5. 1,1 Apparatus 

A-5.1,1.1 Metal moulds — PTFE lined*, suitable for preparing speci- 
mens of diameter 15 + 1 mm and thickness 0-54:0-10 mm. 



*PTFE tape of thickness 0'05 to 0-20 mm is suitable. 

10 



IS : 10011 - 1981 

A-5.1.1,2 Clamps — suitable for use with the moulds. 
A-5.1,l*3 Oven — capable of being controlled at 37+ PC. 
A-5.1.1.4 Oven — capable of being controlled at 6()j:2'*(-. 

A-5.1.2 Procedure — Prepare the resin paste according to the manu- 
facturer's instructions and fill a pair of lined moulds. CHamp the moulds 
and transfer them, within 3 min of the commencement of mixing, to the 
oven, controlled at 37+ 1"C. After 1 h, timed from the commencement of 
nnixing, take the moulds from the oven and remove the two specimen discs. 
Place one disc in the oven, controlled at 60i:2°C, for a further 23 h and 
return the other disc to the oven, controlled at 37±1"C, for the same 
period of time. Remove both discs from their respective ovens and compare 
them using unaided visual examination in diffuse daylight. Only a slight 
change in colour shall be permissible. Retain the disc from the 37^C oven 
Jbr use as a control specimen in the procedure specified in A-5,3. 

A-5,2 Light 

A-5.2.1 Apparatus 

A-5.2.1.1 Metal moulds — Same as in A-5.L1.1. 

A-5.2.1,2 Clamps -S'dmG as in A-5.1.1.2. 

A-5.2.1.3 Ovm ~~'S^\mc as in A-5.1.1,3. 

A-5,2.1.4 Cabinet with adjustable ventilation — (Containing a xenon lamp 
radiation source, and a turn table capable of being rotated at 33 min' ^ 

A-5.3 Procedure Prepare the resin paste according to the manu- 
facturer's instructions and fill a lined mould. Clamp the mould and transfer 
it, within 3 min of the commencement of mixing, to tlic oven controlled 
at 37±1"C. After 1 h, timed from the commencement of mixing, remove 
the specimen disc and blank off half the surface to be exposed to light 
with metal ibil. Place the specimen in a glass dish centred on the turntable 
and cover the specimen with water to a depth of 5 to 20 mm. Position the 
specimen so that it is 75 mm from the centre of the dish and its uppermost 
surface is 350 to 400 mm directly below the xenon lamp. Maintain the 
specimen at a temperature of 37+ 1"C, by adjusting the cabinet ventilation, 
and expose it to the radiation for 23 h with the turntable rotating at 33 
min'i. Replace any water lost by evaporation, so that the specimen is 
always covered to a depth of between 5 and 20 mm. After 23 h exposure, 
remove the specimen from the water and dry with an absorbent cloth or 
tissue. Mark a comparison between the exposed and unexposed areas of 
the test specimen, and then between the exposed portion and tlie control 
specimen from the heat test ( A-5.1.2 ). Only a slight change in colom- 
shall be permissible using unaided visual examination in diffuse daylight. 

11 



IS : 10011 - 1981 

A-6. FILLER CONTENT 

A-6.1 Apparatus 

A-6.L1 Muffle Furnace — Capable o^ being controlled at 575 + 25*^0. 

A-6.1.2 Crucible 

A-6.2 Preparation of Test Specimen — Mix sufficient material to 
provide a test specimen of mass approximately 0*5 g. 

A-6.3 Procedure — Heat the crucible in the mufHe furnace for 15 min 
at 575 + 25^C, allow to cool in a desiccator and weigh to the nearest 0*001 g. 
Place the test specimen in the crucible and weigh the whole to the nearest 
O-OOl g. 

A-6.3.1 Heat the crucible and specimen in the furnace at 575±25"C 
for 30 min. Then carefully remove the crucible with its contents, allow 
to cool in a desiccator and weigh to the nearest 0*001 g. Repeat the cycle 
of heating, cooling and vjGigliin^ until the mass is constant to within 0*001 g. 
Carry out the test on three specimens and report the mean. 

A-6.4 Calculation 

Filler contcntj percent by mass = 'r/ — tt ^ ^^^"^ 

where 

Aft = mass in g of the crucible, 

M2= mass in g of the crucible and the material, and 

M3— mass in g of the crucible and the material after heating. 



APPENDIX B 

{Clause 4.1 ) 

SAMPLING OF RESIN-BASED DENTAL FILLING MATERIALS 

B-1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

B-1.0 In drawing, preparing, storing and handling test samples, the pre- 
cautions and directions given in B-1.1 to B-1,7 shall be observed. 

B-1.1 Samples sliall not be taken in an exposed plar(\ 

B-1.2 The sampling instrument shall be clean and dry. 

12 



IS : 10011 - 1981 

B-1.3 Precautions shall be taken to protect the samples, the material being 
sampled, the sampling instrument and the containers for samples from 
adventitious contamination. 

B-1,4 To draw a representative sample, the contents of each container 
selected for sampling shall be mixed as thoroughly as possible by suitable 
means. 

B-1.5 The samples shall be placed in clean, dry, air-tight glass or other 
suitable containers. 

B-1.6 The sample containers shall be of such size that they are almost 
completely fdled by the sample. 

B-1.7 Each sample coniaincr shall be sealed air-tight with a suitable 
stopper after filhng, and marked with full details of sampHng, the date of 
sampling and the year of manufacture of the material. 

B-2, SCALE OF SAMPLING 

B-2,1 Lot — All the containers in a single consignment of the material 

drawn from a single batch of manufacture shall constitute a lot. If a con- 
signment is declared or known to consist of different batches of manufacture 
tlie containers Ix'longing to the same batch shall he grouped together and 
each such group shall constitute a separate lot. 

B-2.1.1 Samples shall be tested from each lot for ascertaining conformity 
of the material to the requirements of the specification. 

B-2.2 The number of containers to be chosen from the lot shall depend on 
the size of the lot and shall be as given in Table 1. 

B-2.3 The containers shall be selected at random from the lot and in order 
to ensure the randomness of selection, the random sampling methods given 
in IS : 4905-1968* may be followed. 

TABLE 1 NUMBER OF CONTAINERS TO BE SELECTED FOR SAMPLING 

{Clauses B-2.2 andB-3AA ) 

Number of Containers to be Selected 
(2) 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 



*Mrthods for random sampling. 

13 



Lot vSize 




(1) 




Up 


to 


50 


51 


to 


200 


201 


to 


400 


401 


to 


650 


651 


to 


1000 



IS : 10011 - 1981 

B-3. TEST SAMPLES AND REFEREE SAMPLE 

B-3.1 Preparation of Test Samples 

B-3.1.1 Draw with an appropriate sampling instrument a small portion 
of the material from different parts of each container selected ( see Table 1 ). 
The total quantity of the material drawn from each container shall be 
sufficient to conduct the tests for all the characteristics given in 2 and 
shall be not less than 250 g. 

B-3.1.2 Mix thoroughly all portions of the material drawn from the same 
container. Out of these portions^ equal quantities shall be taken from each 
selected container and shall be well mixed up together so as to form a 
composite sample weighing not less than 0*5 kg. This composite sample 
shall be divided into three equal parts, one for the purchaser, another for 
the supplier and the third for the referee. 

B-3.2 Referee Sample — The referee sample consisting of a composite 
sample marked for this purpose shall bear the seals of the purchaser and 
the supplier. It shall be kept at a placed agreed to between the purchaser 
and the supplier and shall be used in case of dispute between the tvvo. 

B-4. TESTS 

B-4.1 Tests for all characteristics given in 2 shall be conducted on the 
comiposite sample. 

B-5. CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 

B-5.1 A lot shall be declared as conforraing to this specification if the 
composite sample satisfies the requirements for each of the characteristics 
listed in 2. If the requirements for any of the characteristics are not met, 
the lot shall be declared not to have satisfied the requirements of the specifi- 
cation. 



14 



