**************** 


-k  is^ 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 

"^^  ^  ^  ^  %  ?R^" 

Jawaharlal  Nehru 

Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New 


^^iiT'jsiS'SfS^^i^*?*:: 


•^■•■^^^■r 


li^  i/ir  w  w  w  w  w  WW  ^  ^  ^  tIt  w  w  w 


BLANK  PAGE 


^<ii^ 


UI> 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  10096  (Part  3):  2002 

Indian  Standard 

RECOMMENDATIONS  FOR  INSPECTION, 

TESTING  AND  MAINTENANCE  OF 
RADIAL  GATES  AND  ROPE  DRUM  HOISTS 

PART  3  AFTER  ERECTION 

(  Second  Revision  ) 


ICS  93.160 


©  BIS  2002 

BUREAU    OF    INDIAN    STANDARDS 

MANAK   BHAVAN,   9    BAHADUR   SHAH    ZAFAR   MARG 
NEW  DELHI  110002 


May  2002  Price  Group  4 


Hydraulic  Gates  and  Valves  Sectional  Committee,  WRD  12 


FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  (Part  3)  (Second  Revision)  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards,  after  the  draft 
finalized  by  the  Hydraulic  Gates  and  Valves  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Water  Resources 
Division  Council.  Noting  lack  of  adequate  systematic  information  on  procedures  for  inspection,  testing  and 
maintenance  of  radial  gates  and  their  hoists  after  erection,  the  Hydraulic  Gates  and  Valves  Sectional  Committee 
decided  that  a  set  of  recommendations  on  this  subject  be  drawn  up  for  reference  and  guidance  of  the  personnel 
engaged  in  these  duties.  This  standard  has  accordingly  been  prepared  to  provide  guidelines  for  radial  gates. 

This  standard  has  been  published  in  parts.  Part  1  deals  with  inspection,  testing  and  assembly  at  manufacturing 
stage.  Part  2  deals  with  inspection,  testing  and  assembly  at  the  time  of  erection.  Part  3  deals  with  inspection, 
testing  and  maintenance  after  erection. 

This  standard  (Part  3)  was  first  published  in  1982.  In  the  first  revision  in  1992,  the  provision  in  respect  of 
inspection  was  elaborated  in  detail.  This  second  revision  of  standard  had  been  taken  up  to  incorporate  the 
knowledge  gained  during  use  of  this  standard.  In  this  revision  an  additional  clause  has  been  added  regarding 
maintenance  of  gates  to  be  operated  in  winter. 

There  is  no  ISO  standard  on  the  subject.  This  standard  has  been  prepared  taking  into  consideration  the  practices 
prevalent  in  the  field  in  India. 

The  composition  of  the  Committee  responsible  for  the  formulation  of  this  standard  is  given  in  Annex  A. 

For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of  this  standard  is  complied  with,  the  final  value, 
observed  or  calculated,  expressing  the  result  of  a  test  or  analysis,  shall  be  rounded  off  in  accordance  with 
IS  2  :  1 960  'Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  (revised)'.  The  number  of  significant  places  retained  in  the 
rounded  off  value  should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  specified  value  in  this  standard. 


IS  10096  (Part  3)  :  2002 


Indian  Standard 

RECOMMENDATIONS  FOR  INSPECTION, 

TESTING  AND  MAINTENANCE  OF 
RADIAL  GATES  AND  ROPE  DRUM  HOISTS 

PART  3  AFTER  ERECTION 

(  Second  Revision  ) 


1  SCOPE 


This  standard  (Part  3)  lays  down  the  recommendations 
for  inspection,  testing  and  maintenance  of  radial  gates 
and  their  rope  drum  hoists  after  erection. 

2  REFERENCE 

The  Indian  Standard  given  below  contains  provisions 
which  through  reference  in  this  text,  constitute 
provisions  of  this  standard.  At  the  time  of  publication, 
the  edition  indicated  was  valid.  All  standards  are 
subject  to  revision,  and  parties  to  agreements  based 
on  this  standard  are  encouraged  to  investigate  the 
possibility  of  applying  the  most  recent  edition  of  the 
standard  indicated  below: 


IS  No. 
7718;  1991 


3  GENERAL 


Title 
Recommendation  for  inspection, 
testing  and  maintenance  of  fixed 
wheel  and  slide  gates  {first  revision) 


3.1  Drain  holes  in  the  horizontal  girders  and  arms 
should  be  checked  so  that  they  do  not  get  clogged  with 
silt  causing  accumulation  of  water  in  the  horizontal 

girders  and  arms. 

3.2  Rope  drums,  pulleys  and  rope  connection  should 

be  checked. 

3.3  Functioning  of  the  limit  switches,  interlocking 
devices,  indication  lamps,  etc,  should  be  checked  for 

proper  working. 

3.4  The  operating  systems  of  the  gate  should  be 
checked  for  their  proper  functioning. 

3.5  Where  stoplogs  are  provided  upstream  of  radial 


gates,  they  should  be  maintained  as  per 
recommendations  contained  in  IS  7718. 

4  INSPECTION 

4.1  Periodical  inspection  of  gate  installations  should 
be  carried  out  to  detect  normal  wear  and  tear,  defects, 
if  any.  It  should  be  done  as  and  when  necessary,  but 
at  least  thrice  in  a  year,  one  being  prior  to  the  onset  of 
monsoon  and  one  immediately  after  the  monsoon  and 
one  at  other  times.  The  gates  should  be  operated  up 
and  down  several  times  to  make  sure  that  everything 
is  in  order. 

4.2  Inspection  work  may  consist  of  visual  inspection 
of  exposed  surfaces  of  embedded  parts,  such  as  sill 
beam,  wall  plate  including  seal  seats,  gate  leaf,  arms, 
trunnion  assembly,  trunnion  girders,  hoisting 
equipment,  hoist  supporting  structures  and  checking 
of  important  dimensions.  In  cases  of  inaccessible  parts, 
inspection  may  be  necessary  by  other  means  like 
divers,  etc. 

4.3  Inspection  of  Radial  Gates 

No  piece  of  equipment,  however  well  designed  and 
sturdy,  will  run  efficiently  unless  it  is  well  kept  and 
maintained.  Therefore  the  details  of  inspection  to  be 
done  and  the  schedule  of  maintenance  are  given  here. 

4.3.1  Periodical  Inspection 

In  order  to  detect  normal  wear  and  tear,  defects,  if 
any,  periodical  inspection  of  gate  installation  should 
be  carried  out.  The  periodical  inspection  of  gates  and 
hoists  should  be  done  as  and  when  necessary,  but  at 
least  thrice  a  year  and  corresponding  to  the  periods 
when  the  water  level  in  the  reservoir  is  at  its  highest 
and  lowest  levels. 


IS  10096  (Part  3)  :  2002 


In  short,  premonsoon  and  post-monsoon  inspections  should  be  done  and  the  following  checks  be  exercised: 


Points  to  be  Inspected 
(1) 


Compliance 
(2) 


I  Inspection  of  yoke  girder,  thrust  block,  trunnion  assembly  and  anchorage 

1 .  Check  Nuts  and  bolts  : 

a)  Trunnion  assembly 

b)  Trunnion  bracket  to  yoke  girder 

c)  Nuts  of  horizontal  and  vertical  anchorage 

d)  Trunnion  pin  lock  plates 

e)  Check  shear  key  if  provided  behind  the  trunnion 
bracket 

f)  Nuts  of  the  main  tie  rods 

2.  Check  the  weld  between  yoke  girder  and  main  ties 

3.  Check  whether  yoke  girder  and  thrust  block  is  covered 
so  that  water  does  not  accumulate  in  the  slots. 

4.  Check  whether  trunnion  pin  ends  are  covered  with 
anticorrosive  jelly 

5.  whether  flexible  sheath  cover  is  provided  to  prevent 
entry  of  debris  in  the  trunnion  assembly 

6.  Check  the  welds  of  thrust  block  (with  magnifying 
glass)  (also  ensure  that  the  inside  is  concreted) 

7.  Check  if  the  oval  holes  are  free 

8.  Check  grease  in  trunnion  assembly 


Check  for  torque 

do 

do 
Check  tightness 
Check  for  cracks 

Check  for  tightness  and  torque 

For  soundness 

Cover  with  3  mm  thick  M.S.  plates  if  not 

already  covered 

Cover  it  if  not  already  covered 


do 


Check  for  cracks.  Rectify  accordingly 


9.      Check  the  flexible  cover 


II  Arms 


1       Check  welding  joints  of  arm  to  horizontal  girder  (with 
magnifying  glass,  preferably  on  joints/stiff eners) 

2.  Check  whether  drain  holes  provided  in  the  arms  are 
clear  of  debris. 

3.  Check  nuts  and  bolts  of  arms  to  horizontal  girder 

III  Horizontal  girder 

1 .     Check  welding  of: 

a)  Stiffeners  of  horizontal  girders 

b)  Horizontal  girder  to  stiffeners  of  skin  plate 

c)  Locking  arrangement  brackets  of  skin  plates 

d)  Check  drain  holes  of  horizontal  girder 

IV  Skin  plate  assembly  and  rubber  seals 

1 .     Check  the  following  welding  joints: 

a)  'T'  and  skin  plate  and  ribs 

b)  Vertical  joints  of  skin  plate  from  upstream  side 
and  downstream  side 

c)  Check  lifting  bracket  and  lifting  pins  for  its 
soundness 

d)  Latching  brackets  to  skin  plate 


Remove  debris  or  other  accumulated  material 

Take  steps  for  greasing  after  removal  of  dirt, 
if  any 

Replace,  if  necessary  and  clean  dirt  from  pin 
surface  below  the  same 


Check  for  cracks:  rectify  accordingly 
Clear  them  if  choked  up 
Check  for  tightness  and  torque 


Check  for  crack  and  other  defects  and  rectify 
accordingly 
do 
Check  for  weld  crack 
Clear  them  if  choked  and  clean  the  debris 
accumulated  regularly 


Check  for  crack  and  other  defects  and  rectify, 
if  necessary 


Check  welding  with  a  magnifying  glass  and 
rectify,  if  required 


IS  10096  (Part  3)  :  2002 


Points  to  be  Inspected 
(1) 


Compliance 

(2) 


The  skin  plate  should  be  observed  for  pitting,  scaling 
and  corrosion  on  upstream  side: 


a) 


b) 
c) 


d) 
e) 

0 


Check  the  condition  of  side  and  bottom  rubber 

seal  comer  joint  and  observe  leakage 

All  the  nuts  and  bolts  fixing  rubber  seal  to  skin 

plate 

Check  if  there  is  any  undesirable  material  in 

between  seal  and  stainless  steel  plate,  seal  and 

seal  base 

Check  for  deformation  of  seal 

Check  soundness  of  cladding  in  case  of  cladded 

rubber  seals 

Check  whether  there  is  abnormal  abrasion  on  seal 

seat 


V  Sill  beam  and  wall  plates 

1 .  Check  the  following  joints  : 

a)  Wall  plate  to  sill  beam 

b)  Joints  between  two  segments 

c)  Stainless  steel  to  structural  steel 

2.  Check  wall  plate  and  sill  beam  for  pitting  and  rusting 
and  general  conditions 

VI  Guide  roller 

1 .  Check  the  roller  for  its  movements  and  setting 

2.  Check  the  nuts  and  bolts  of  guide  roller  assembly 

VII  Latching  arrangement 

1 .  Check  whether  latching  device  functions  well 

2.  Check  nuts  and  bolts  and  studs  of  locking  devices 

3.  Check  the  drain  holes 

VIII  Wire  ropes,  hoist,  pulleys,  sheaves,  etc 

1 .     Check  for  following  : 

a)        Check  condition  of  wire  rope 


b)       Check  pulley,  sheave  assemblies  and  sockets 


c)        Check  turn  buckles 


d)  Check  tension  of  wire  ropes 

e)  Check  if  end  of  wire  rope  is  properly  fastened  to 
drum 

f)  Check  for  lubrication  of  wire  ropes,  if  required 


Scaling  formation  should  be  removed.  Pitting 
should  be  filled  with  weld  and  grinded  for 
finish.  For  corrosion  clean  it  and  apply  paint. 
If  condition  is  poor,  replace  same.  Check  the 
cause  of  undue  wear  also  before  replacement 
Check  for  wear  and  tear,  tightness  and 
replace,  if  required. 

Remove  it  (All  debris  should  be  periodically 
removed  from  the  seal  surface) 

Study  the  cause  of  deformation  and  rectify  it 
do 

Study  the  cause  of  abrasion  and  rectify  it 


Check  for  crack  and  other  defects  and  rectify 
Rectify  the  joints  using  proper  welding  rods 
and  grind,  as  necessary 
do 
Pitting  is  to  be  filled  in  by  welding.  Rusted 
portion  should  be  painted  after  cleaning 


Make  the  roller  free.  If  jammed,  clean  and 

grease 

Check  for  wear  and  tear  and  tightness 


Check    the    function    by    operating    lever. 
Rectify  the  same  if  movement  is  not  smooth 
Tighten  the  bolts  if  required 
Clean  them  if  required 


If  the  condition  is  poor,  then  replace  the  wire 

rope  and  if  10  percent  broken  wires  are 

within  the  length  of  one  meter  and  more  than 

20  percent  broken  wire  within  the  length  of 

10  m  wire  ropes  should  be  replaced 

Check  the  condition  of  pins  and  every  year 

these  should  be  removed,  cleaned  and  refitted 

after  lubrication 

Check   for   rusting,  jamming   in   the   turn 

buckles,  and  check  if  the  number  of  threads 

holding  the  rope  are  adequate 

Adjust  both  wire  ropes  for  equal  tension 

If  found  loose,  tighten  the  studs  provided  for 

Lubricate  ropes 


IS  10096  (Part  3) :  2002 


Points  to  be  Inspected 
(1) 


Compliance 
(2) 


IX  Gear  train  assembly 

1 .     Check  the  following: 

a)  Check  the  condition  of  gear  and  pinions 

b)  Check  position  of  gears  and  pinion 

c)  Check  shaft  and  couplings  used  for  connecting 
drive  unit  and  gear  train 

X  Drive  unit 

1 .     Check  the  following: 

a)       Check  the  condition  and  functioning  of  electro- 
magnetic brake 


b)  Check  al!  electrical  connection  of  hoist  motor, 
brake,  starter,  limit  switch,  etc.  Also  check 
remote  control  systems,  if  provided 


c)  Check  the  connecting  arrangement  from  adjacent 
motor 

d)  Check  the  condition  of  position  indicator  and  all 
its  accessories 

e)  Reduction  gear  box  (worm  reducer) 

XI  Check  nuts  and  bolts  of  the  following  : 

a)  Hoist  frame  ) 

b)  Drive  unit      J 

c)  Gear  boxes  1 

d)  Flange  coupling  j 

e)  Bearing  housing  1 

f)  Foundation  bolts  of  hoist  bridge  J 


Check   uneven   wear   and   contact,    adjust 

properly 

Bring   them   to   correct  position   if  found 

shifted  to  either  side 

Visual  inspection  and  coupling  nuts  to  be 

checked 


Replace  worn  out  liner,  adjust  brake  shoes 
carefully,  so  that  both  the  shoes  hold  the 
drum  when  supply  is  cut  off  or  both  the  shoes 
should  move  out  simultaneously  if  switched 
on.  Brake  drum  and  liner  should  always  be 
free  from  grease,  oil,  etc 
Check  for  loose  connection,  proper  insulation 
(rats  and  crabs  damage  the  insulation) 
Overload  relay  of  the  starter  is  to  be  adjusted, 
for  correct  position  and  should  not  be 
disturbed 


Check  for  its  proper  function  and  rectify 

Check  for  smooth  operation  and  check  oil 
level 


Check  for  wear  and  tear  and  tightness 

Tighten   if  required   or   replace   if  undue 

wearing  noticed 

Inspect  for  cracks  in  housing  and  replace,  if 

needed  check  foundation  bolts  and  tighten  if 

required 


4.3.2  General 
Inspection  to  check  that: 

a)  The  gate  operation  should  be  trouble  free  and 
there  should  not  be  unusual  sound. 

b)  On  load  (that  is,  when  there  is  water)  there 
should  be  no  undue  vibrations  in  the  gate  and 
the  structure. 

c)  Observe  the  current  drawn  by  motor  at  the  time 
of  lifting  of  gate.  If  any  excessive  current 
drawn  is  noticed,  operation  of  hoist  should  be 
stopped  immediately  and  reason  for  the  same 
may  be  investigated  for  lubrication  of  various 
parts  of  gates  and  hoists  and  rectified. 

d)  Check  the  supply  voltage. 

e)  Check  the  lubrication  at  various  points. 

f)  Check  the  condition  of  painting  of  various  parts. 


5  TESTING 

5.1  The  gate  should  be  tested  for  its  travel  up  and 
down  to  see  that  it  moves  smoothly  without  excessive 
sway  throughout  the  length  of  travel. 

5.2  The  operation  should  be  trouble-free  and  there 
should  not  be  any  unusual  sound.  There  should  not  be 
any  undue  pressure  or  extra  efforts  when  the  gate  is 
operated  under  no  load  condition. 

Any  extra  current  being  taken  by  the  motor  should  be 
taken  note  of. 

5.3  On  load  (that  is,  when  there  is  water)  there  should 
be  no  undue  vibrations  in  the  gate  and  structure  during 
operation  of  the  gate.  In  case  vibrations  are  noticed, 
the  positions  of  gate  openings  and  water  levels  should 
be  noted  and  the  reasons  thereof  should  be  investigated. 

5.4  Based  on  the  inspection  and  testing,  suitable 
remedial  measures  should  be  taken  {see  6). 


IS  10096  (Part  3)  :  2002 


5.5  Trouble  Locating  Chart 


Trouble 
(1) 


Probable  Reasons 
(2) 


1 .     Gate  does  not  rise 


2.    Gate  vibrates  or  produces  noise 


3.    Motor  does  not  function 


4.     Starter  not  working 


5.    Unusual  sound 


1  ^    No  supply  or  low  voltage  (supply) 

2.  Obstruction  in  rubber  seals 

3.  Obstruction  in  guide  rollers 

4.  Fault  in  electric  motor 

5.  Fault  in  wiring 

6.  Blown  out  fuse 

7.  Brake  shoes  jammed 

8.  Wire  rope  broken 

9.  Malfunctioning  of  electrical  contacts  due  to  any 
reason 

1 .  Lack  of  lubrication  in  trunnion  and  guide  rollers 

2.  Rope  length  not  identical  on  both  sides 

3 .  Lack  of  lubrication  or  fault  in  wire  rope  pulley 
sheave  arrangem^ts 

1.  No  supply 

2.  Starter  not  in  order 

3.  Blown  out  fuses  in  switches 

4.  Low  voltage 

5.  All  fiises  are  not  working 

1.  No  supply  to  starter 

2.  Fixed  and  moving  contacts  not  in  order 

3.  Limit  switch  engaged 

Verify  the  spot  and  attend  to  the  following; 

1 .  Mis-alignment  of  any  particular  component 

2.  Shearing  of  connecting  bolts  and  nuts 

3 .  Lack  of  lubrication 

4.  Entry  of  any  extraneous  matter  into  guide  roller 
assembly  or  pulley  sheaves  or  trunnion 
assembly. 


6  MAINTENANCE 

6.1  The  maintenance  of  radial  gates  and  their  hoists 
mechanism  should  be  done  regularly.  Reference  should 
be  made  to  manufacturer's  instructions  for  detailed 
maintenance  and  servicing  of  hoists.  Proper  record 
of  inspection,  testing  and  maintenance  should  be  made 
by  the  project  authorities. 

6.2  The  following  maintenance  works  should  be 
attended  to: 

a)  Defective  weld  should  be  chipped  out  and  it 
should  be  rewelded.  Damaged  nuts,  bolts, 
rivets,  screws,  etc,  should  be  replaced.  Any 
pitting  should  be  filled  up  by  welding  and 
finished  by  grinding,  if  necessary. 

b)  The  gate  leaf,  exposed  embedded  metal  parts, 
hoists  and  hoist  supporting  structure,  etc. 


c) 


d) 


e) 


f) 
g) 


should  be  thoroughly  cleaned  and  repainted 
when  required.  While  deciding  about  repaint- 
ing, the  original  painting  system  adopted 
should  be  kept  in  view. 
Trunnion  bearing  should  be  greased  wher- 
ever required.  Keeping  trunnion  bearings  in 
perfect  working  condition  is  very  important. 
All  other  bolted  connections  should  also  be 
checked  for  proper  tightness. 
Bolts  and  trunnion  bearing  housing  should 
be  tightened  wherever  required. 
The  seals  of  the  gate  should  be  checked  for 
wear  and  tear  and  deterioration.  These  should 
be  adjusted/replaced,  as  and  when  necessary. 
Wire  ropes  should  be  properly  greased. 
Oil  level  in  the  worm  reduction  unit  should 


IS  10096  (Part  3):  2002 


be  maintained  by  suitable  replenishment.  Oil 
seals  should  also  be  replaced,  if  required. 
Lubrication  of  other  parts  of  the  hoists,  such 
as  chains,  position  indicators  and  limit 
switches  should  also  be  done. 

h)  The  stroke  of  the  brake  should  be  reset  to 
compensate  for  lining  wear.  Worn  out  brake 
linings  should  be  replaced  in  time. 

j)  Flexible  couplings  should  be  adjusted,  if  re- 
quired. 

k)  Repairs  and  replacement  of  electrical  relays 
and  controls  should  be  attended  to. 

m)  Maintenance  of  alternative  sources  of  power, 
such  as  diesel  generating  sets  and  alterna- 
tive drives  wherever  provided  should  be  car- 
ried out. 

n)  The  list  of  essential  spare  parts  to  be  kept 
available  should  be  reviewed  and  updated 
periodically.  The  availability  of  essential 
spare  parts  should  be  ensured.  The  condition 
of  spares  should  be  checked  periodically  and 
protective  coating  given  before  use. 

p)    Lubrication  details: 

1)    Grease    —     Multipurpose 

—    Bearing  grease 
Application  points: 
i)  Pulley  sheaves 
ii)  Pulley  brackets 
iii)  Guide  rollers 
iv)  Trunnion  assembly 


v)  Rope  drums 
vi)  Line  shaft  bearings 
vii)  Matching  teeth  of  gear  box  assembly 
Once  before  rainy  season  or  as  required 

2)  Cardium  compound 
Application  points: 

Wire  ropes 

Once  in  every  season  after  cleaning  of  wire 

ropes  or  as  required 

3)  H.P.  90  Gear  oil 
Application  points: 

i)  Reduction  gear  box 

Level  up  the  gear  box  before  operation 

4)  Mobil  oil 
Application  points: 

i)  All  rubbing  surfaces  and  oiling  points 
ii)  At  points  located  in  brass/metal  bushes 
Once/twice  a  year. 
6.3  In  case  of  gates  to  be  operated  during  winter, 
generally  water  leaking  through  water  tight  parts  gets 
frozen  and  grows  to  be  ice  lumps.  Chances  are  that 
such  ice  lumps  adhere  to  the  gate  leaf  or  embedded 
parts  causing  troubles.  Therefore  in  case  of  such  gates 
following  remedial  measures  shall  be  taken  in  addition 
to  the  maintenance  work  given  in  6.2. 

a)  Water  leakage  shall  be  prevented. 

b)  Ice  at  gate  leaf  and  embedded  parts  may  be 
removed  by  the  manual  or  by  any  anti- 
freezing  method  without  damaging  gate 
components. 


IS  10096  (Part  3) :  2002 


ANNEX  A 

{Foreword) 

COMMITTEE  COMPOSITION 

Hydraulic  Gates  and  Valves  Sectional  Committee,  WRD  12 


Organization 


In  Personal  Capacity  (2047,  Pocket  2,  Sector  D,  Vasant  Kunj, 
New  Delhi  ]\0  070) 

Bhakra  Beas  Management  Board,  Nangal 

Bharat  Heavy  Electricals  Ltd,  Bhopal 

Central  Water  and  Power  Research  Station,  Pune 

Central  Water  Commission,  New  Delhi 

Cimmco  Ltd,  Bharatpur 

Gea  Energy  System  (India)  Ltd,  New  Delhi 

Haryana  State  Minor  Irrigation  (Tubewell),  Chandigarh 

Himachal  Pradesh  State  Electricity  Board,  Sundemagar 

Irrigation  Department,  Govt  of  Maharashtra,  Nasik 
Irrigation  Department,  Govt  of  Punjab,  Chandigarh 

Irrigation  Department,  Govt  of  Uttar  Pradesh,  Roorkee 

National  Hydroelectric  Power  Corporation  Ltd,  Faridabad 

Orissa  Construction  Corporation  Ltd,  Bhubhaneshwar 

Public  Works  Department,  Government  of  Tamil  Nadu,  Chcnnai 

Texmaco  Ltd,  Kolkata 

Triveni  Structurals  Ltd,  Allahabad 

Tungabhadra  Steel  Products  Ltd,  Bellary 

Water  Resources  Development  Training  Centre,  Roorkee 
BIS  Directorate  General 


Representative(s) 
Shri  N.  Vishwanathan  (Chairman) 

Deputy  Chief  Engineer 

Executive  Engineer  {Alternate) 

Shri  A.S.  Srivastava 

Shri  S.R.  Rathore  (Alternate) 

Shri  R.  M.  Khatsuria 

Shri  R.M.  Sinnarkar  {Alternate) 

Director  (Gates  -  E&NE) 

Director  (Gates-NW&S)  {Alternate) 

Executive  President 

Sr  Manager  (Design)  {Alternate) 

Shri  K.C.  Bahety 

Shrj  a.  G.  K.  Murty  (Alternate) 

Shri  S.P.Gupta 

Shri  R.  S.Chauhan  (Alternate) 

Chief  Engineer  (Design) 

Director  (PLNG)  Design  Civil  II  (Alternate) 

Shri  V.  C.  Shelke 

Chief  Engineer  [RSDD] 

Director  (M&E)  (Alternate) 

Chief  Engineer  (Design)  and  Director 
Superintending  Engineer  (Alternate) 

Shrj  A.  K.  Sachdeva 

Shri  G,  S,  Sharma  (Alternate) 

Director  [Mechanical] 

Senior  Manager  (Design)  (Alternate) 

Shri  M.  EKjrairaj 

Shri  T.  Krishanaswamy  (Alternate) 

Shri  S.  R.  Sinha 

Shri  Udayan  Banerjee  (Alternate) 

ShriJ.P.Mishra 

Shri  B.  P.  Singh  (Alternate) 

ShriG.S.Annigeri 

Shri  N.  Kannaiah  Naidu  (Alternate) 

Prof  Gopal  Chauhan 

Shri  S.S.Sethi,  Director  &  Head  (WRD) 
[Representing  Director  General  (Ex-qfficio)] 


Member-Secretary 

Shri  Kuldeep  Sirohi 

Deputy  Director  (WRD),  BIS 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1986  to  promote 
harmonious  development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of  goods 
and  attending  to  connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  in  any  form  without 
the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the  course 
of  implementing  the  standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade 
designations.  Enquiries  relating  to  copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (Publications),  BIS. 

Review  of  Indian  Standards 

Amendments  are  issued  to  standards  as  the  need  arises  on  the  basis  of  comments.  Standards  are  also  reviewed 
periodically;  a  standard  along  with  amendments  is  reaffirmed  when  such  review  indicates  that  no  changes  are 
needed;  if  the  review  indicates  that  changes  are  needed,  it  is  taken  up  for  revision.  Users  of  Indian  Standards 
should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or  edition  by  referring  to  the  latest  issue  of 
'BIS  Catalogue'  and  'Standards:  Monthly  Additions'. 

This  Indian  Standard  has  been  developed  from  Doc  No.  :  WRD  12  (285). 


Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 

Amend  No.  Date  of  Issue  Text  Affected 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 

Headquarters  : 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  1 10  002  Telegrams  :  Manaksanstha 

Telephones  :  323  01  31,  323  33  75,  323  94  02  (Common  to  all  offices) 

Regional  Offices :  Telephone 

Central        :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg  /  323  76  17 

NEW  DELHI  110  002  \  323  38  41 

Eastern        :  1/14  C.I.T.  Scheme  VII  M,  V.  I.  P.  Road,  Kankurgachi  r337  84  99,  337  85  61 

KOLKATA  700  054  L337  86  26,  337  91  20 


Northern     :  SCO  335-336,  Sector  34-A,  CHANDIGARH  160  022  f  60  38  43 

60  20  25 


{: 


Southern     :  C.I.T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  CHENNAI  600  113  f  254  12  16,  254  14  42 

\  254  25  19,254  13  15 

Western       :  Manakalaya,  E9  MIDC,  Marol,  Andheri  (East)  J  832  92  95,  832  78  58 

MUMBAI400  093  L  832  78  91,  832  78  92 

Branches  :  AHMEDABAD.  BANGALORE.  BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR.  COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD.  GHAZIABAD.  GUWAHATI.  HYDERABAD.  JAIPUR.  KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW.  NAGPUR.  NALAGARH.  PATNA.  PUNE.  RAJKOT.  THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 


Printed  at  Simco  Printing  Press,  Delhi 


