**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10013-3 (1981) : water soluble type wood preservatives. 
Part 3: Copper-chrome-boron (CCB) wood preservative [CED 9: 
Timber and Timber Stores] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



13 110013 {Part III )-1BS1 

( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
WATER SOLUBLE TYPE WOOD '^^ 

PRESERVATIVES 

PART 111 COPPER-CHROM£ BOROH (CCB) 
WOOD PR£SERVATLVE 



UDG C74'048 ; 66ia(76-256'6l 




INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK |1HAVA,N. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARC 

NEW DELHI IFtmO? 



i 1- I I * I SI ■ ■" 



Fehrttflty 1982 



IS : 10013 (Part in )< 1981 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

WATER SOLUBLE TYPE WOOD 

PRESERVATIVES 

PART III COPPER-CHROME-BORON (CCB) 
WOOD PRESERVATIVE 

Timber Sectional Committee, BDC 9 

Chairman Representing 

Inspector General of Fokests Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation 

Members 

Shhi S. S. Abhyankar Engineer-in-Chief 's Branch, Army Headquarters 

Shkx S, K. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Additional Insfeotor General Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation 

OF Forests 
Shri S. K. Bakerjee National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri D. K, Kanunoo ( Alternate ) 
Chief Conservator of Forests Agpriculture, Forests and Co-operation Depart- 
ment, Government of Gujarat, Ahmadabad 
Additional Chief Conserva- 
tor OF Forests ( Alternate ) 
Director Indian Plywood Industries Research Institute, 

Bangalore 
Director, Forest Research and Forest Department, Government of Kamataka, 

Utilization Bangalore 

Director ( Track ) Railway Board ( Minisjtry of Railways ), New 

Delhi 
Joint Director ( Works ) ( Alternate ) 
Cmdb V. P. Garo Naval Headquarters 

Assistant Industrial 
Manager ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. H. Hinoorani Forest Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh, 

Lucknow 
Shri K. S. Lauly Federation of Indian Plywood and Panel Industry, 

New Delhi 
ExECiTTiVE Director ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



C) Copyright 1982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10013 ( Part III )- 1981 



( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 
ShuiJ. S. MATHABtr 

Shri p. V. Mehta ( Alternate ) 
Dr a. N. Nayer 
ShkiJ. N. Pandby 

Shbi B. M. Prasad {Alternate) 
President 

General Secretary ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. K. Purkayastha 

Dr a, PlTRtTSHOTHAM 

Dr V. Ranganathan 

Shri G. V. Rao 

Shri U. B. Kanchan ( Alternate ) 
Dr R. S. Ratra 

RePRESE N T ATIVE 

Shri J. K. Sinha ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. N. Sanyai. 

Shri A, C. Sekhab 

Shri Sharan Siitgh 

Shri F. C. Shabma 



Representing 

Directorate General of Technical Development, 
New Delhi 

In personal capacity ( C-59, Inderpuri, New Delhi ) 
Bihar State Forests Development Corporation Ltd, 
Patna 

Indian Academy of Wood Science, Dehra Dun 

Forest Research Institute & Colleges ( Wood 

Anatomy Branch ), Dehra Dun 
Indian Plywood Manufacturing Co Ltd, Bombay 
In personal capacity ( C28-C, N Block, Malviya 

Nagar Extn. Saket, New Delhi 110017 ) 
Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) 



Shri G. Raman, 

Director ( Civ Engg ) 



National Buildings Organization, New Delhi 
Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Forest Research Institute & Collegci ( Timber 

Mechanics Branch ), Dehra Dun 
In personal capacity {26 S.B.H. Colony, P.O. 

SrinagiAr, Hyderabad 500873 ) 
Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, 

New Delhi 
Directorate General of Civil Aviation ( Ministry 

of Tourism and Civil Aviation), New Delhi 
Director General, ISI ( Ex~qfficio Member ) 



Secretary 

Shri J. R. Mehta 

Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI 



Convener 
Dr a. Puritshotham 

Members 



Timber Seasoning and Treatment Subcommittee, BDC 9 : 3 

Indian Plywood Manufacturing Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. R. Bhatnagar Castrol Ltd, Bombay 

Shri R. A. Savoor ( Alternate ) 
Chief Conservator of Forests Forest Department, Government of Assam, Dispur 
Forest Officer, Timber 
Treatmej^t Plant ( Alternate ) 
Chief Conservator of Forests Forest Department, Government of Karnataka, 
( Development ) Bangalore 

Director of Forest Research 
and Utilization ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 7 ) 



IS : 10013 ( Part III ) - 1981 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

WATER SOLUBLE TYPE WOOD 

PRESERVATIVES 

PART III COPPER.CHROME*BORON (CCB) 
WOOD PRESERVATIVE 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part III ) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 30 November 1981, after the draft finalized by 
the Timber Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Civil 
Engineering Division Council. 

0-2 With the rapid industrial development of the country, coupled with 
increased construction activity alround, the demand for timber for 
construction purposes has greatly increased. In viev/ of the limited 
availability of naturally durable species, such as teak ( Tectona grandis ) 
and sal ( Shareatobusta ), it is imperative that supplies of durable timbers are 
augmented "by selected timbers of lesser durability which, when suitably 
treated, would give increased life under service conditions. Preservative 
treatment of timber, therefore, forms a very important part of the national 
effort to conserve the material resources of the country, and to achieve 
their most economic utilization. 

0.3 IS : 401-1982* covers types of preservative, methods of treatment, and 
the type and choice of treatment for different species of timber for a 
number of uses. The standard also lists various oil type, organic solvent 
type, and water-soluble (leachabie) and water-soluble (fixed) type 
preservatives. The efficiency of preservative treatment depends, besides 
the proper choice of preservative and the treatment process, on the quality 
of the preservative to ensure required absorption and penetration of the 
preservatives. This standard has been formulated to lay down require- 
ments of Copper-Ghrome-Boron (CCB) — a water-soluble (fixed) type 
preservative. 

0.4 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to 
international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing 
in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the 
field in this country. 



♦Code of practice for preservation of timber ( third revision ). 

3 



IS: 10013 (Part III) -1981 

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part III ) covers the requirements for copper-chrome- 
boron — a water-soluble (fixed) type wood preservative specified for 
treatment of timber and other lignocellulosic materials as given in 
IS: 401-19821. 

1.2 This standard covers the composition of the preservative, quality 
of chemicals forming the composition, and sampling procedure for 

analysis. 

1.3 The analysis procedures for different ingredients have been covered in 

IS: 2753 ( Part I )- 1964 J. 

2. COMPOSITION AND PROPERTIES OF PRESERVATIVE 

2.1 Copper-chrome-boron preservative formulation shall consist of the 
following active ingredients in nominal proportions by weight as shown 
below: 



Boric acid 


HsBOa 


18'0 


Copper sulphate 


CUSO4.5H2O 


35'0 


Sodium dichromate 


Na2Cr207,2H20 ^ 




or 


V 


47-0 


Potassium dichromate 


KjjCr207 I 





2.1.1 The percentage of any of the ingredients shall be not less than 
that shown below: 



Boric acid 


H3BO3 




15-5 


Copper sulphate 


CUSO4.5H2O 




32-5 


Sodium dichromate 


Na2Cr207.2HaO 


■^ 




or 




> 


44-5 


Potassium dichromate 


KgCraO, 


J 





♦Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised), 
fCode of practice for preservative of timber ( third revision ), 

^Methods for estimation of preservatives in treated timber and in treating solutions: 
Part I Determination of copper, arsenic, chromium, zinc, boron, creosote and fuel oil. 



IS : 10013 ( Part III ) - 1981 

2-2 The preservative may be in a dry solid form, semi-liquid paste or 
solution, 

2.3 In case of dry solid, the preservatives shall contain not less than 
95 percent of .the active ingredients mentioned under 2.1. 

2.3.1 In all cases, the percentage of active ingredients, and amount 
of moisture shall be labelled on the container as well as descriptive 
literature of the product. 

2.4 Each of the chemicals used for such formulation shall be not less than 
of 95 percent purity, 

3. SAMPLING 

3.1 Samples shall be taken from requisite number of drums out of the 
supply made at one particular time according to sampling procedure laid 
down in 18:4905-1968*. 

3.2 In case of solution or paste, the same shall be thoroughly mixed with 
a rod and at least 1 kg sample shall be taken for chemical analysis from 
each drum, 

3«3 In case of dry powder form, a true representative sample of the 
preservative not less than 10 percent of the contents shall be taken for 
analysis. 

3.4 At least 1 kg of the preservative shall be dissolved to obtain 15 
percent solution of the preservative. 

3.5 A small amount of the 15 percent solution may be drawn and diluted 
exactly to 5 percent for chemical analysis. 

4. TESTE4G 

4.1 The chemical analysis of the solution with respect to its various 
ingredients shall be carried out according to 3.4 of IS : 2753 ( Part I )- 
1964t» The proportion of all chemicals shall comply with 2.1 and 2.1.1 . 

5. MARKING 

5.1 Each container shall be legibly marked with the following information: 

a) Manufacturers' name, or trade-mark, if any; 

b) Date of manufacture; and 

c) Percentage of dry active ingredients. 



*Methods for random sampling 

fMethods for estimation of preservatives in treated timber and in treating solutions: 
Part I Determination of copper, arsenic, chromium, zinc, boron, creosote and fuel oil. 



IS : 10013 ( Part lU)- 1981 

5.1.1 The container may also be marked with the ISI Certification 
Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions 
of the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and 
Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the 
requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and 
quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer. 
ISI marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity to that 
standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the 
use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, 
may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 



IS : 10013 ( Part III ) - 1981 

( Continued from page 2 ) 

Members Representing 

Chief Conservator of Forests Forest Department, Government of Maharashtra, 

Bombay 
FoBEST Utilization Officer ( Alternate ) 
Director Indian Plywood Industries Research Institute, 

Bangalore 
Db S. Ananthanarayanan {Alternate ) 
Director ( Track ) Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ), New 

Delhi 
Joint Dibeotor ( Wobks ) ( Alternate ) 
District Forest Officeb Forest Department, Government of Andhra 

Pradesh, Hyderabad 
Shri J, C.Jain Forest Research Institute & Colleges (Forest 

Research Laboratory ), Bangalore 
Shri Y. K. Lauly The Gurdit Institute Pvt Ltd, Dharwar 

Dr Bidhi Sinoh Bains ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. S. Mathartt Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri P. V. Mbhta ( Alternate ) 
Db R, S. Ratba National Buildings Organization, New Delhi 

ShbiS. N. Shaema Forest Research Institute & Colleges (Wood 

Seasoning Branch ) , Dehra Dun 
Shri J. K. Sinha Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shbi Gclam Alam ( Alternate ) 
Shbi Shibomani Sharma Development Commissioner for Handicrafts, New 

Delhi 
Shri V. C. Shukla ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. R, Sonti Ascu Hickson Ltd, Calcutta 

Shbi S. Shiva ji ( Alternate ) 
Dr M. C. Tewari Forest Research Institute & Colleges ( Wood 

Preservation Branch ), Dehra Dun 



INDIAN STANDARDS 

ON 

PRESERVATION OF TIMBER 

IS: 

287-1973 Recommendations for maximum permissible, moisture content of timber 

used for different purposes ( second revision ) 
401-1982 Code of practice for preservation of timber ( third revision ) 
1 141-1973 Code of pratice for seasoning of timber {Jirst revision ) 
1902-1961 Code of practice for preservation of bamboo and cane for non-8tructurai 

purposes 
2683-1980 Guide for installation of pressure impregnation plants for timber 

( second revision ) 
2753 ( Part I )-I964 Methods for estimation of preservatives in treated timber and in 

treating solutions : Part I Determination of copper, arsenic, chromium, zinc, 

boron, creosote and fuel oil 
2753 (Part II )-1968 Methods for estimation of preservatives in treated timber and in 

treating solutions : Part II Determination of copper ( in copper naphthenate) 

and pentachlorophenol 
4833-1968 Method for field testing of preservatives in wood species 
4873-1968 Method for laboratory testing of wood preservatives against fungi 
6341-1971 Method of laboratory test for efficacy of wood preservatives against soft rot 
6497-1972 Method of test for eflScacy of preservatives and evaluating the natural 

durability of timbers used in cooling towers 
6791-1973 Method of testing natural durability of timber and efficacy of wood 

preservatives against marine borers 
7315-1974 Guidelines for design, installation and testing of timber seasoning kilns 

( compartment type with cross forced air circulation ) 
9096-1979 G. P. for preservation of bamboo and canes for structural purposes 



