**************** 



^ tOTH: 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New" ' 



IS 10060 (1981) : Code of Practice for Subsurface 
Investigation for Power House Sites [WRD 5: Gelogical 
Investigation and Subsurface Exploration] 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




^*-:gv 




^^35^* 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS:I0M0.|98I 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR SUBSURFACE 
INVESTIGATION FOR POWER HOUSE SITES 



UDC 624-131 -31; 621 311:00676 




© Copyright 1982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARCT 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr 4 Se^tmktT 1962 



IS : 10060 - 1961 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR SUBSURFACE 
INVESTIGATION FOR POWER HOUSE SITES 



Subsurface Exploration Sectional Committee, BDC 49 

Ckatrmaii 

Shri V, S. Kkishnaswamy 
622, Sarakki Layout, I Phase 14th Cross, Bangalore 

Members Representing 

Shri P A. Bakshi The Cementation Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri D. J. Ketkar ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. K. Bhandari Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), 

Roorkee 
Shri V. S. Agcarwal { Alternate ) 
Shri S. R. Budetwal Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab, 

Chandigarh 
Shri V. K. Aggarwal ( Alternate ) 
Chief Engineer ( Irrigation ) Irrigation & Power Department, Government of 

Rajasthan, Jaipur 
Shri K R. Datye In personal capacity ( Rehem Mansion No. 2, 44, S. 

Bhttgat Singh Road, Colaba, Bombay 400039 ) 
Director Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkee 

Director ( CSMRS ) Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Superintending Engineer, 
Chenab Investigation Circle, 
Janunu ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. L Goriami Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay 

Shri V. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shr] a. D Narain Roads Wmg, Ministry of Transport 

Dr a N. Jangle ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. M. Narurkar Asia Foundation and Construction ( P ) Ltd, Bombay 

Dr P S. Nigam Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh, 

Lucknow 
Shri G Pant Geological Survey of India, Calcutta 

Shri B. K. Panthakv Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. K Fotedar ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. K. Pillai Voltas Ltd, Bombay 

Shri A N Indurkah ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyngkt 1982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in vifhole or m part by any means except with written permMsion of the 

pubtilher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10060 - 1981 



( Conhnutd from pagt 1 ) 

Memhers 
Research Officer, MERI 

ShRI S. SATAPATHr 

Shbj K R Saxena 
Senior GeOlooist 

Superintending Enoinjer, CDO 

SuPERlMTENDiNQ E^f&lNEtR 

( Geology } ( Alternate ) 
Skri G. Raman, 

Director ( Civ Engg ) 



Representing 

Irrigation Department, Government of Maharashtra, 

Bombay 
Irrigation and Power Department, Government of 

Orissa, Bhubaneswar 
Engineering Research Laboratories, Hyderabad 
Irrigation DqDartment, Government of Kamataka, 

Bangalore 
Irrigation Department, GDvemment of Gujarat, 

Gandhinagar 

Director General, ISI ( Ex-o^to Mimbtr ) 



Secretary 

Shri K K Sharma 
Deputy Director [ Civ Engg ), ISI 



AMENDMENT NO. I AUGUST 1998 

TO 

IS 10060 : 1981 CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

SUBSURFACE INVESTIGATION FOR POWER 

HOUSE SITES 

[ Page 5, clause 2 J.l(a) ] — Substitute 'exists' for 'exit'. 

[Page 6, clause 2J.2{e), line 2 ] — Substitute 'fluvioglacial' for 
'fluioglaciat'. 

[ Page 8, clause 3.13(a) ] — Substitute 'Penna frost' for 'Pennofrost'. 

[ Page 9, clause 3.2.1(d) j — Insert 'oC between 'depth' and 'water'. 

[ Page 10, clause 333(b), line 5] — Substitute 'electrical' for 'electric'. 

[ Page 11, clause 4.13.2, line 2 ] — Suhsiitute 'cavity' for 'cavyit'. 

[ Page 13, clause 43J, line 6 ) — Substitute 'Poisson's' for 'Poission's'. 



(RVD05) 



Reprography Uni;, BIS, New Detlii. lulia 



IS ! 10060 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR SUBSURFACE 
INVESTIGATION FOR POWER HOUSE SITES 



0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 31 December 1981, after the draft finalized by the Subsurface Exploration 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 

0.2 With the increasing demand for power in the country, an increasingly,^ 
large number of power houses ( hydroelectric, thermal, and nuclear ) are 
being built. One of the major requirements m planning, design and con- 
struction of these power houses is proper and adequate subsurface investi- 
gation. The object of subsurface and related site investigation is to provide 
the engineer with as much information as possible about the existing condi- 
tions, for example, the thickness of overburden and other geological features 
of the area. This code has been prepared to serve as a guide in such investi- 
gations. 

0.2.1 The methods of subsurface investigation enable vertical sections 
of the strata to be drawn based on tn-silu tests, samples tested for determining 
characteristics such as shear strength parameters, bearing capacity of the 
soil, permeability, water table, and soil or rock type classification. This 
information together with the normal topographical survey provides the 
engineer with complete details of the site and enables him to prepare 
economical designs for the power house structures. 

0.3 In the formulation of this standard, due weightage has been given to 
co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different 
countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field m this country. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing 
the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS . 2-1960*. 
The number of significant places retained in the rounded oflT value should 
be the same as that of the specified value m this standard. 



*Ruie3 for loiinding off numerical values ( remsed ) 

3 



IS ! 10060 . 1981 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard gives guidance on the type, extent and details of sub- 
surface exploration needed in connection with power houses of the following 
types: 

a) Hydroelectric power houses : 

i) Surface power houses, and 
ii) Underground power houses ; 

b) Thermal power houses, and 

c) Nuclear power houses. 

1.1.1 This standard provides guidelines for planning the exploratory 
work, through various stages of the project development. These recommenda- 
tions may have to be modified for individual projects, depending upon the 
site conditions and other conditions peculiar to each project, such as height 
and importance of the power house and the heterogeneity of foundation for- 
mulations. 

1.2 The term subsurface exploration, as used herein, covers all types of 
exploration connected with determination of the nature and extent of soil 
at or near the power house site. 

1.3 This code does not, however, cover the types and methods of exploration 
for materials of construction for power houses such as soil and rock and 
material for riprap. 

2. GENERAL 

2.1 In the design of some components of power house structure foundations, 
special attention is given to the effect of vibrations and sensitivity to settle- 
ments. Hence, the results of subsurface exploration should provide enough 
data for the study of these features and exploration should be very detailed 
and thorough Faults, shear zones, weathered horizon and joints found 
in the rock mass constituting the foundation shall be demarcated. All 
changes in rock type and formation contacts shall be studied in detail. 

2.2 The type and extent of exploration shall be commensurate with the 
size and importance of the project and will depend upon the size of the 
power house and the type of foundation. 

23 Subsurface explorations in connection with a power house shall cover 
a specified area around the power house site and shall be carried out to a 



IS : 10060 . 1981 

specified depth. Depending upon the type oi' power house, investigation 
shall be required for the following areas of the power house complex : 

a) Forebay, 

b) Penstocks, 

c) Locations of turbine and generators, 

d) Afterbay, 

e) Switch and transformer yards, 

f ) Foundations of high stacks ( chimneys ) , 

g) Area of boilers, 

h) Nuclear reactors and ancillaries, and 
j ) Other power house components. 

2.3.1 A complete programme of exploration shall be able to give infor- 
mation regarding the following pomts: 

a) Types of different soil and rock masses that exit in the foundation 
and abutments; 

b) The location, sequence, thickness and aerial extent of eaclw» 
soil/rock stratum, including a description and classification of 
the soils, their mineral and chemical constituents and their 
structure, stratification in the undisturbed state, sigmficant 
geological or other structural features, such as buried channels, 
seams, joints and fissures, 

c) The depth and type of bedrock as well as the location, sequence, 
thickness, arcal extent, altitude, depth of weathering, soundness, 
and description of rock in each rock stratum within the depth 
of exploration; 

d) The characteristics of the ground water, including whether the 
water table is perched or normal, influent or affluent, direction 
of flow of ground water, depth of and pressure in artesian zones 
and chemical quality of ground water; and 

e) Engineering properties of the overburden and rocks. 

2.3.2 Exploration shall also be needed for study of the following problems : 

a) Determination of stability of slope adjacent to plant excavation; 

b) Determination of the stability and erosion characteristics of the 
tail race channel ( to know if lining is required ) , 

c) In the case of thermal stations, if water is to be obtained from 
wells, subsurface studies directed to location of wells and their 
design, and the effects of suction and depletion of subsoil water 
level in the power house structure foundations ( see Note ) ; 



IS : 10060 - 1981 

Note — Possibility of sulphuric acid and sulphates formed by the percolat]L.n 
of water through ash dumps of thermal plants using coal reaching the foundations 
and their impact, such as attack on concrete/steel or leaching of certam saJts 
causing foundation settlement may also be examined 

d) In hydroelectric power houses the effect of seepage water on 
subsurface material; 

e) Landslides, Rockfalls and Avalanches — The stability of glacial and 
fluroglacial material with thin soil cap, creep of soil covered hill 
slopes, etc, shall be studied In the case of power houses placed 
at the foot of a hill or on a steep hillside, the hill slope shall be 
examined for existing or potential landslides or rockfalls. The 
location of power houses in high altitude areas shall take into 
account the possibility of avalanches affecting the stability of 
the power houses; and 

f ) In the case of nuclear power houses located on seashore, shoreline 
stability may be assessed. 

».4 For soils, test in accordance with 18:2131-1963* and 4.3, 4.4 
and 12.2 of IS 6955-1973t may be conducted at the required locations. 

2.4.1 Wherever drilhng in rock is resorted to, NX or larger size would 
be preferably used as large diameter cores would be useful for studying 
jomt patterns and fracturing {see IS : 6926-1973J ). As loads are heavy, 
shear tests on rock samples may be necessary. 

2.5 For general principles and procedures to be followed for investigation 
and sampling, reference may be made to IS ■ 1892-]979§. For exploration 
by pits, trenches, boring, drifts and shafts, references may be made 
to 7 to II of IS : 6955-19731- 

2.6 The extent of foundation exploration required for power houses of 
given size varies from site to site, depending on the subsurface conditions, 
and cannot be adequately visualized in advance The exploration generally 
proceeds in stages, the details of each stage growing out of the one before 
It normal!/ follows a learn-as-you-go procedure in which characteristics 
of the subsurlkce soils and conditions are developed m progressively greater 
detail as the exploration proceeds. 



•Method for standard penetration test for soils 

fCode of practice for subsurface exploration for earth and rockfill dams 

JCode of practice for diamond core drilling for site investigation for river valley projects 

SCode of practice for subsurface investigations for foundations (first reoiswn) 



IS : 10060 ■ 1981 

2.7 The subsurface exploration required for a power house are grouped 
under the following stages: 

a) Reconnaissance stage investigations ; 

b) Preliminary stage investigations; 

c) Detailed or pre-design stage investigations ; and 

d) Construction stage investigation 

2.7.1 The type of investigations required for the last 3 stages will be the 
same ; only difference being m the details of information gathered, quanta- 
tively. Therefore, after describing the reconnaissance stage investigations, 
the type of information required for the last 3 stages are described together 
and then the quantitative detail of information for all the 3 stages. If it is 
found that the properties of foundation material vary too much, then, in 
each bay, information shall be gathered at least at 3 points. 

2.8 Type of Information Required 

2.8.1 Settlement 

2.8.1.1 For finding out the safety of the power house, in so far as 
uniform and equal settlement are concerned, the following investigations 
shall be carried out: 

a) A chart showing tlie strata below final foundation level up to 
one-and-a-half times the width of the substructure of the 
power house housing the main generating equipment shall be 
prepared. Investigations shall be earned out to find out if 
there are compressible clay or other objectionable layers 
within this depth. In rock with adequate bearing characteristics 
the bore holes need to penetrate only about 8 m. For the 
purpose of investigation, unless otherwise known, it may be 
assumed that the foundation of hydroelectric plants generally 
are 9 to 12 m beiow the original ground surface. 

b) The safe bearing pressure at the foundation level of the power 
station shall be found out in (i) dry, (li) normal, and (in) sub- 
merged soil conditions 

2.8.1.2 In order to predict any settlement, modulus of the foundation 
soil, that IS, intensity of soil pressure divided by the settlement shall be 
found for ail different malerials met with in the substrata up to depths 
indicated in 2.8.1.1. This modulus shall be found for dry, normal and 
submerged conditions of the strata 

2.8.2 Sliding — For the stability of the power house it is important to 
see that the horizontal forces acting above any plane and tending to slide 
the structure along that plane are not greater than the resisting forces of 
friction or the shear strength of the materials of foundations forming the 
plane. 



IS : 10060 - 1981 

2.8.3 Ground Water Conditions — In order to find the extent of submergence 
of the soil, high and low spring levels at the site of the power house shall 
be recorded 

2.8.4 DynamK Stability — For the determination of dynamic stability, 
dynamic properties of the soil shall be determined in accordance with 
IS : 5249-1977* and also to the requirements of IS : 1893-I975t. 

2.8.5 Any other characteristics required by the field or design engineer 
for a particular locality shall also t>e determined. 

3. HYDROELECTRIC SURFACE POWER HOUSES 

3.1 Reconnaissance Stage Investigations 

3.1.1 The scope of investigation during this stage is confined to the 
investigation of the suitability of constructing a surface hydel power house 
m the area where the required drop is available to create head for generation 
of electricity The investigation with the general reconnaissance of the 
area shall be done on 1 • 50 000 scale topo-maps having contour interval 
of. 20 m, so as to establish broad topographical and geological features 
df the foundation material. 

3.1.2 In case the site is near hilly slopes, stability of the hill slopes shall 
be investigated. In sites subject to avalanches, the direction of avalanche 
routes and the magnitude of avalanches shall be studied. 

3.1.3 In case of sites at high altitude, investigation shall clearly bear out 
the suitability of foundation material with particular reference to the 
following conditions: 

a) Permofrost, and 

b) Stability of glacial and diluroglacial material with a thin soil 
cap. 

3.1.4 The presence and extent of artesian pressures below the foundation 
material shall be investigated to determine whether the site is suitable 
for power house location or not. 

3.2 Preliminary Stage Investigations 

3.2.1 Objectives and Types and Methods of Exploration — During this stage 
data for formulation of the project are collected. The coverage of exploration 



*Method of test for determinalion of dynamic properties of soil [first remston) 
fCritena for earthquake resistant design of structures ( third revuton ) 



IS : 10060 . 1981 

shall be adequate for examination of the feasibility which includes estimation 
of the cost and evaluation of the benefits. This stage also includes studies 
for preliminary choice of the alignment as well as the height of the power 
house. This stage of exploration includes the following. 

a) Exploration by test pits, trenches, drifts and shafts; 

b) Exploration by geophysical methods, 

c) Exploration by drilling using coring and non-coring methods 
or by other boring methods, 

d) Determination of the depth water table and evaluation of field 
p)ermeability; observation of temperature, pressure and dis- 
charge of springs not at the surface or in exploratory borings, 
trenches, etc; 

e) Field penetration and field density test in overburden; and 

f) Laboratory tests on representative samples and undisturbed 
samples for the determination of engineering properties of 
the overburden material. 

3.2.2 In order to fix the preliminary dimensions of the power station 
and its general lay-out it will be necessary to give the information required 
in 3.4 

3.2.3 After locating the most suitable site from the results of reconnais- 
sance stage investigation, information specified in 2.8 shall be found out 
for one point only situated at the middle of possible power house layout. 

3.2.4 In case of location in alluvium soil, investigation shall bring out 
presence, if any, of layers of silt, peat, quick sand or a high content of clay 
which might cause foundation problems. 

3.3 Detailed ( Pre-constmction ) Invesdgatioii Stage 

3.3.1 These investigations are required for obtaining data required for 
detailed design of all structures related to the power house. These investi- 
gations shall be conducted at the final location of the power house and 
appurtenant works fixed from preliminary stage investigations. 

3.3.2 In this stage of investigation, all data required for detailed design 
and preparation of construction drawings shall be collected. Close co- 
ordination IS essential between the work of the orgamzations for exploration, 
geological work and design. 



IS : 10060 • 1981 

3.3.3 Investigations at this stage shall comprise the following: 

a) Intensive exploration by additional drilling and pitting ( tren- 
ches and shafts v^rhere found necessary ) of the foundation to 
determine spatial distribution and characteristics of different 
types of foundation materials in relation to specific design 
features ; 

b) Use of geophysical methods to define in greater detail the 
subsurface conditions, such as the depth to bed rock or depth 
to water table in specific sections of the power house base. 
During this stage, use of borehole geophysical methods, such 
as electric logging, as and when required, may be found 
advantageous to define particular characteristics of overburden 
and bed rock, 

c) Defining of geohydrological characteristics of the foundations 
and their environments through pumping in or pumping out 
tests as dictated by site conditions; 

d) Ascertaining the groutability of foundations through trial 
grouting of specified reaches; and 

e) Special field tests like blasting tests { to determine whether 
the materia] is liable to liquefy under seismic disturbance ) 
and field shear tests wherever found necessary 

3.3.4 Information specified in 3.4 may be obtained for at least one point 
situated at the middle of the unit bay, erection bay and control bay. More 
boreholes may be required, depending upon the geological conditions. 

3.4 Construction Stage — Construction stage exploration shall aim at 
making available data generally for the evaluation of specific foundation 
preparation and treatment. In case, after actual excavation, it is found 
that the proi)erties of foundation material vary too much, then, in each 
bay, information shall be gathered at least at 3 pomts. A complete record 
of the foundation features shall be maintained at this stage. This is essential 
for the solution of post construction problems, if any. 

4. HYDROELECTRIC UNDERGROUND POWER HOUSES 

4.1 Reconnaissance Stage Investigations 

4.1.1 The scope of investigations during this stage is confined to the 
selection of the most suitable sites from the geological considerations, 
besides satisfying the engineering requirements The investigation shall 

10 



IS : 10060 - 1981 

proceed with the general reconnaissance of the area on I : 50 000 scale 
topo-maps having contour of 20 m to establish broad geomorophological 
features. Lithological characters and altitude of the host rock and its major 
jointing, shear zone and pattern, and the major structural and tectonic 
features, such as folds, faults and thrusts, shall be recorded and their signi- 
ficance in terms of the seismicity of the area shall be evaluated After 
eliminating obviously unsatisfactory sites, reconnaissance stage explorations 
shall be done to establish the nature and extent of overburden cover and 
major active or potential slide features along the slope. Preferably, thmly 
bedded fissile and highly fractured rocks shall be avoided and slope con- 
figuration shall be studied with reference to stability and availability of 
sound rock cover over the cavitv A programme of surface and subsurface 
investigations shall be chalked out for the selected site to establish the 
depth of open and slump joints or potential slide mass as well as depth 
to sound rock over the proposed cavity. The reconnaissance stage investi- 
gations shall include those indicated in 4.1.2, 4.1.3 and 4.1.4. 

4.1.2 Surveys 

4.1.2.1 Topographic survey on 1 : 1 000 scale shall be carried out, 
extending from the head race tunnel end to the tail race tunnel end and 
covering the hill slope for 150 m on either side of the proposed sites of the 
power house structure and penstocks. This shall be used as a base map 
for detailed geological mapping in the preliminary stage of investigation 
to demarcate significant geological and structural features of the area 

4.1.2.2 Topographic sections shall be taken on 1 : 1 000 scale at 
approximately 30 m interval covering the entire area noted in 4.1.2.1. 
The geology of the area shall be plotted along these sections and projected 
to the power house grade to develop forecast sections for further geotechnical 
evaluation. 

4.1.3 Subsurface Exploration 

4.1.3.1 Drifts — A minimum of one drift for each alternative shall 
be excavated normal to general trend of contours towards the power house 
location to explore the extent of rehef or slump jointing and depth to sound 
rock, nature and spacing of prominent joints, fractures and shear zones, 
at and around the power house cavity. This drift will also help in providing 
data on ground water conditions. The drift shall preferably be 2-2 m x 1 -5 m 
in sections and wherever possible it shall be located near the proposed 
haunch elevation of the power house cavity. A few cross cuts may also 
become necessary for exploration of specific features. 

4.1.3.2 Diamond core drilling — Selected drilling, wherever feasible, 
for one or 2 holes may be required to demarcate rock cover over the cavyit 
and lithologic contmuity of the rock units harbouring the power house 

11 



IS I 10060 ■ 1981 

cavity and to explore the existence of solution cavities, if any. Each hole 
shall be drilled down to the base of the proposed power house unit and 
water permeability tests shall be performed in its entire length in stages 
which shall normally be restricted to 3 m [ see IS : 5529 ( Part I )-1969* 
and IS : 5529 ( Part II )-I973t j- Water bearing conditions shall also 
be observed in the entire section of the hole. 

4.2 Preliminary Stage Investigations 

4.2.1 Here the object of mvestigations is to select the most suitable site 
foT a power house based on the interpretations o{ surface and subsurface 
exploration data, comparative and subsurface exploration data, and compa- 
rative evaluation of the various alternatives. Detailed geological mapping 
shall be carried out concurrently with the recommended subsurface explora- 
tioris and at least the following features shall be recorded: 

a) Surface geological mapping shall establish: 

i) Various hthological units present in the area, their altitudes 

^ ^ and continuity, susceptibility to weathering, geometry of 

•I the structural weak planes such as joints, nature of filling 

of the planes of discontinuity, slip planes, shear zones, folds 

and faults; 

ii) Demarcation of covered area with remarks on the nature 
of the material, creep and slide features; 

in) Ground water conditions; 

iv) Existence and nature of springs - hot or cold ; and 

v) Pressure of any oil or gas shows. 

b) The observations m the exploratory tunnel should include: 

\) Litbologic characters of the various rock units; 
11) Their amenability to tunnelling, 
in) Limit of slump joints or glide cracks, 
iv) Depth to sound rock; 

v) NaturCj spacing and continuity of prominent joints, slip 

planes, minor and major shear zones; and 
vi) Study of stress field. 

c) Collection of core samples of various rock types for determination 
of elastic and engineering properties in the laboratory. 



*Gode of practice for tji'Situ permeability tests ; Part I Tests m overburden. 
tCode of practice for m-s^iu permeability test Part II Tests in bedrock 



12 



IS : 10060 - 1981 

4.2.2 Based on the results of subsurface explorations, suitable recom- 
mendations regarding the location and orientation of the power house 
cavity shall be made. A programme of subsurface exploration by drift 
extending up to the tentative power house location shall be made in order 
to have a detailed assessment of the geological discontinuities present at 
the power house site. The drift shall preferably run along the long axis 
of the power house having at least 3 cross cuts on either side of the power 
house axis and extendmg up to the power house walls. The drifts may 
preferably be kept at haunch level of the roof arch. If these studies indicate 
the presence of adverse geological discontinuities with reference to the 
long axis of the power house, the orientation of the cavity shall be suitably 
modified. In general, it is undesirable to have prominent geological dis- 
continuities parallel or nearly parallel to the long axis of the power house 
or along high walls and rock cuts. 

4.3 Detailed and Pre-design Stage Investigations 

4.3.1 The object of the investigation is to provide a fairly clear picture 
of the existing geological conditions likely to be present at the power house 
cavity for design of the cavity and outline ol the excavation programme 
and treatment. 

4.3.2 Critical geological observations shall be made in the exploratory 
tunnels made m the cavity area and the driJJ holes driiJed earlier. Rock 
mechanics studies regarding geological discontinuities shall be correlated 
with surface observations and drill hole data. Suitable number of tests 
shall be performed for the determination of in-situ modulus of elasticity, 
Poission's ratio and determination of stress field in various directions, 
(see IS ; 7292-1974* and IS : 7317-1974t ) and also the properties of 
imjjortant shear zone materials and joint fillings. 

4.3 J Investigations shall cover an area around the cavity of 3 to 5 times 
its larger dimension, depending upon the geological complexities deciphered 
in the preliminary investigation stage 

4.4 Construction Stage Investigations 

4.4.1 The object of construction stage investigation is to explore and 
systematically record in 3 dimensions the geological features and related 
problems met with which are not revealed during the pre-design stage 
explorations or were revealed during the pre-design stage and their ex- 
plorations were deferred for the construction stage, Such explorations shall 
be done according to the day-to-day requirements of the projects. A com- 
plete record of the foundation features shall be maintained at this stage 
This is essential for the solution of post-construction problems, if any. 



*Code of practice for tn-situ determination of rock properties by Hat jatk. 
■fCode of practice for uniaxial jacking test for deformation modulus of rock 

13 



IS ! 10060 ■ 1981 

5. THERMAL POWER STATIONS 

5.1 Investigations for thermal power houses shall generally be on the lines 
suggested for hydroelectric surface power houses { see 3) and shall cover 
points appropriate to this type [ see slso 2.3.2(c) [. For general principles 
and procedures to be followed for investigation and sampling, reference 
may be made to IS : 1892-1979*. 

6. NUCLEAR POWER HOUSES 

6.1 Reconnaissance Stage 

6.1.1 In this stage, the most suitable sites are reconnoitered from geologi- 
cal, engineering and environmental considerations. Prior to field visits 
it is preferable to study the area with the help of aerial photographs, in 
the scale of either 1 . 60 000 or 1 . 25 000, to mark out the lithological 
units, geomophological features, like old slide debris, and tectonic features 
including lineament trends of the area. The last mentioned study shall 
be done with an objective of obtaining evidences for and against recent 
activity along faults. These studies shall also be directed towards geohydro- 
]<mical characteristics of the area. Limited ground checks are called for 
afler a. detailed photogeological assessment of the area. At this stage itself, 
to select alternative sites for further surveys and exploration, data on the 
seismic status of the area within a radius of 100 km of the site shall be 
collected and analysed. Wherever study of existing 1 : 2 000 000 tectonic 
maps indicate the existence of scismogcnic features, the area of photo 
coverage may be extended to a radius of 300 km. A mobile seismic instru- 
mentation unit to record micro-earthquake may be required in case seismo- 
genic features are suspected within the area studied as above. 

6.1.2 Topographic survey maps in 1 : 25 000 or 1:15 000 scale shall 
be used as base maps for geological mapping during the reconnaissance 
stage. Spring levels and general ground water table conditions existing in 
the area shall also be assessed. 

6.2 Preliminary Stage 

6.2.1 Surveji — The object of the investigation is to carry out detailed 
geological mapping in 1 1 000 scale with a view to portraying the features 
of the promising alternative sites. This geological mapping shall aim to 
establish the following: 

a) The various lithological units present in the area, their altitude 
and continuity with a view to establish bands of sufficient width 
of hard and homogeneous material suitable for founding the 
heavy units of the power house. 



"Code of practice for subsurface investigations for foundations {fast Tevisjon 

14 



IS : 10060 - 19B1 

b) The validity of the faults interpreted from photogeologic studies, 
and if proved, their status of activity on field evidences shall be 
collected and plotted. In addition similar studies of faults, inter- 
preted from field mapping which were not picked up by photo- 
geological studies, shall also be carried out. 

6.2.2 Subsurface ExpUration — In areas covered by debris or terrace 
gravels, geophysical surveys can be considered for evaluating depth and 
nature of bedrock along with level of ground water table. A few diamond 
drill holes, preferably of NX or larger size, shall be drilled for establishing 
bedrock and for obtaining the cores for determining physical properties 
like compressive strength and modulus of elasticity by laboratory tests 
both under dry and wet conditions ( after 72 hours of soaking in water ) . 
In such drill holes, the water table if encountered, shall be carefully, 
recorded and, in addition, cyclic water percolation tests shall be performed 
for determining the permeability of the foundation material It is essential 
that drilling be done for a depth of 10 m into fresh rock and during drilling 
double core barrel utilising bottom discharge bits shall be used. In case 
of alluvial formations, wash borings, auger holes, penetration tests, etc, 
shall be done to assess the nature of the sub-soil material and also to obtain 
undisturbed samples for the determination of .soil properties. 

6,2.2.1 In case of sandy alluvial foundation strata, geophysical blast 
test shall be done to determine whether the material is liable to liquefy 
under seismic disturbances. 



6.2.3 Geohydrologual Surveys — Date-wise data on the occurrence of springs 
and water table in dug wells or tube wells of the area shall be collected. 
The repeat measurements of these shall be done before and after the mon- 
soon season and water table maps prepared. Data on aquifer characteristics 
shall be collected and depth to water table maps prepared. The chemical 
quality of the ground water shall also be determined. 

6.3 Pre-constructioii State — Layout of the structure vts-a-vu the geology 
having been generally fixed, further exploration shall be carried out by 
coring holes drilled at the comers and grade, for determimng the nature 
of the actual foundation materia] and its physical characteristics, including 
tn-sttu permeability. The site of the lighter structures shall also be investi- 
gated by a few drill holes or trial pits. In addition, in-sttu load bearing 
tests may be conducted in overburden, alluvial and soft rock foundation 
to evaluate precisely the deformation characteristics. From these data, 
detailed geological sections for use in the final design of the structure shall 
be prepared. 

15 



IS 1 10060 - 1981 

6.4 Construction Stage 

6.4.1 Depending upon the design and engineering requirements of 
day-to-day work, explorations and recording of geological features and 
related problems, revealed during the pre-construction or construction 
stage shall be carried out to guide the treatment of weak zones encountered 
during excavation of the foundation. A complete record of the foundation 
features shall be maintained at this stage. This is essential for the solution 
of the post-construction problems, if any The foundation grade geotechnical 
maps shall be prepared in 1 : 100 scale, giving details of the major/minor 
rock structures, lithological variations, nature and abundance of the planes 
of discontinuities with their spatial distribution and nature of infilling 
material, if any, and water table conditions. 



16 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS (SI UNITS) 
Bm« Units 



Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 




Length 


metre 


m 




Mjwi 


kilogram 


kg 




Time 


second 


s 




Electric current 


ampere 


A 




Thermodynamic 


kelvin 


K 




temperature 








Luminous intensity 


candela 


cd 




Amount of substance 


mole 


moi 




Supplementary Units 








Quantity 


Untt 


Symbol 




Plane angle 


radian 


rad 




Solid angle 


steradian 


sr 




Derived Units 








Quontity 


Unit 


SymboJ 


Definition 


Force 


newton 


N 


IN =1 Icg.m/s* 


Energy 


joule 


J 


1 J = 1 N.m 


Power 


watt 


W 


1 W = 1 J/s 


Tlux 


weber 


Wb 


I Wb = I V-s 


Flux density 


testa 


T 


IT =1 Wb/m» 
1 Hz =1 c/s (s-') 


Frequency 


hertz 


Hz 


Electric conducunce 


Siemens 


S 


IS = i A/V 


Electromotive force 


volt 


V 


IV =1 W/A 


^,^rgsure, stress 


pascal 


Pa 


1 Pa =1 N/m' 



INDiAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

Manak Bhavan. 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. NEW DELHI 1 10002 



Telepiiones : 26 60 21, 27 01 31 

Regional Offices- 

Western : Novelty Chambers, Grant Road 
Eastern ; S Chowringhee Approach 
Southern r C. I. T. Campus 
Northern : B69, Phase VII 



flronch Offices: 
'Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur 
'F' Block, Jnlcy BIdg, Narasimharaja Square 
Gangotrl Complex, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar 
22E Kalpana Area 
S-8-S6C L. N. Gupta Marg 
R 14 Yudhlster Marg, C Scheme 
1I7/4IBB Sarvodaya Nagar 
PatlJputra Industrial Estate 
Hantex SIdg {Jnd Floor). RIy Station Road 



Telegrams t Manaksanstlia 





Telephone 


BOMBAY 400007 


37 97 29 


CALCUTTA 700072 


27 SO 90 


MADRAS 600113 


tl 24 42 


S. A. S. NAGAR 


._ 


(MOHALl) 160051 




AHMADABAD 380001 


2 03 91 


BANGALORE 560002 


22 48 05 


r BHOPAL 462003 


6 27 16 


BHUBANESHWAR 7SI0I4 


5 36 27 


HYDERABAD 500001 


22 10 83 


JAIPUR 302005 


6 98 32 


KANPUR 208005 


4 72 92 


PATNA 800013 


6 28 08 


TRIVANDRUM 695001 


32 27 



Printsd u Minipil Pew*r Prim, hhnipil, India 



