**************** 



-k is^ 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 

"^^ ^ ^ ^ % ?R^" 

Jawaharlal Nehru 

Step Out From the Old to the New 



^\i»>js«'5!S^^^5*9*:: 




•^■•■^^^■r 




li^ i/ir w w w w w WW ^ ^ ^ tIt w w w 



BLANK PAGE 



^<ii^ 





UI> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



IS : 10099- 1982 

(Reaffirmed 2004) 



METHODS FOR PREPARATION, 
MARKING AND MEASURING OF FABRIC 
SPECIMENS AND GARMENTS IN TESTS FOR 
DETERMINATION OF DIMENSIONAL CHANGE 



UDC 677064 : 687 1 : 677 017035 




^ Capyrighi 1982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MAWAK. BHAV.\N, 9 nAnnVDUR SHAH ZAFAR MARC 

NEW DELHI 110002 



Gr 5 



Oti^bef 19B2 



IS : 10099 - 1982 

Indian Standard 

METHODS FOR PREPARATION, 

MARKING AND MEASURING OF FABRIC 

SPECIMENS AND GARMENTS IN TESTS FOR 

DETERMINATION OF DIMENSIONAL CHANGE 

Chemical Methods of Test Sectional Committee, TDC 5 

Chairman Representing 

Dr ( KuMABi ) M. D. Bhavsab The Silk & Art Silk Mills' Research Association, 

Bombay 

Members 

Shei Jamshed D. Adbiantala The Tata Mills Limited, Bombay 
Dk V. G, Aonihotki National Peroxide Limited, Bombay 

Shbi a. K. Bandopadhyay Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

KuMARi L. C, Patel ( Alternate ) 
Shbi P. T. BaNERJi Punjab State Hosiery & Knitwear Development 

Corporation Limited, Chandigarh 
Shbi P. K., BaSTT Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals ( Inspec- 

tion Wing ), New Delhi 
Shri a. K. Saigal ( Alternate ) 
Shbi M. L. Behrani Ministry of Defence ( R&D ) 

Shbi A. K. SmoH ( Alternate ) 
Sebi B. V. Bhatt Ahmedabad Manufacturing & Calico Printing Co 

Ltd, Ahmadabad 

Shri K. G. Shah ( Alternate ) 
Shbi C. Bhattacharya Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Limited, 

Vadodara 
Shri D. K. Chattopadhyay ( Alternate ) 
Dr D. K. Das National Test House, Calcutta 

Shbi M. D. Dixit The Bombay Textile Research Association, Bombay 

Dk a. S. Dutt Indian Jute Industries' Research Association, 

Calcutta 
Shbi S. B. Habdas Wool Research Association, Bombay 

Da B. R. Manjunatha Textiles Committee, Bombay 

Dr ( Shrimati ) G. R. 
PHAI.G0MAKI ( Alternate ) 
Shri Sunil S. Mbhta Silk & Art Silk Mills' Association, Bombay 

Dk S. N. Pandey Cotton Technological Research Laboratory 

( ICAR ), Bombay 
KuMABi I. G. Bhatt ( Alternate ) 

{ Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10099 - 1982 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri C. K, Phadke Office of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay 

Shei K. S. Desikan ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. S. Psavao All India Handloom Board, Bombay 

Shri N. S. Saraiya The Bombay Textile Research Association, Bombay 

Shri S. R. Anakthakrishna Binny Limited, Madras 

Setty 

Dr M. G. Modak ( Alternate ) 
Shri Jamnadas K. Shah The Arvind Mills Limited, Ahmadabad 

Shri Kajiubhai M, Shah The Bombay Millowners' Association, Bombay 

Shri R. C. Shah Ahmedabad Textile Industry's Research Association, 

Ahmadabad 
Shri K. S. SRiinvASAiT Crescent Dyes & Chemicals Limtited, Calcutta 

Shbi R. S. Bajekal ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. S. Trivedi Ahmedabad Textile Industry's Research Association, 

Ahmadabad 
Shbi S. M. Chakrabobty, Director General, ISI { Ex-qfficio Member ) 



Director ( Tex ) 



Secretary 

Shbi G. S. Abhyankar 

Deputy Director ( Tex ), ISI 



Physico- Chemical Test Methods Subcommittee, TDC 5:15 

Convener 

Shbi M. D. Dixit The Bombay Textile Research Association, Bombay 

Members 

Db V. G. Aa:sriHOTEi National Peroxide Limited, Bombay 

Shbi S. P. Chakrabosty Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri G. C. Shtjkla ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. V. Chiniwalla The Bombay Dyeing & Manufacturing Go Ltd, 

Bombay 
Shri C. A. Desai Kamla Mills Limited, Bombay 

DiBECTOE ( Labobatobv ) Textiles Committee, Bombay 

Dr ( Shbimati ) G. R. 
Phalgumaki ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. B. H i.BDAS Wool Research Association, Bombay 

Shbi M. R. Pabanjape The Silk & Art Silk Mills Research Association, 

Bombay 
Dr N. D. Ray Shri Dinesh Mills Ltd, Vadodara 

Shbi Kanubhai M. Shah The Bombay Millowners' Association, Bombay 

Shri D. R. Shabma The Century Spg & Mfg Go Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi Mahesh Sharma ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. C. Som Indian Jute Industries' Research Association, 

Calcutta 
Shbi K. S. Sexnivasan Crescent Dyes & Chemical* Limited, Calcutta 

Shbi R. S. BaJEKaL ( Alternate ) 
Shbi A. Subramaniaii Madura Coats Ltd, Madurai 

Shbi A. Chellasaj ( Alternate ) 



IS : 10099 - 1982 

Indian Standard 

METHODS FOR PREPARATION, 

MARKING AND MEASURING OF FABRIC 

SPECIMENS AND GARMENTS IN TESTS FOR 

DETERMINATION OF DIMENSIONAL CHANGE 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution en 30 April 1£82, after the draft finalized by the Chemical 
Methods of Test Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile 
Division Council. 

0.2 Dimensional stability of fabrics and garments is an important 
characteristic. Therefore, the measurement of dimensional change due 
to various treatments like washing, dry cleaning, soaking in water, 
steaming, etc, is very necessary. Preparation, marking and measuring 
of fabric specimens and garments before and after treatment is as 
important as the testing procedures for accurate and reliable results; 
this standard has been prepared to avoid discrepancies in this area. 

0.3 This standard is mainly based on ISO 3759-1976 Texiles— 'pre- 
paration, marking and measuring of fabric specimens and garments in 
tests for determination of dimensional change ', and the compatible 
additions have been made in this standard. 

0.4 Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 1976 stipulates the use of 
International System of Units in the country; in order to familiarize the 
industry with this system, the recommended SI Units for use in the 
textile industry are given in Appendix A. 

0.5 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with 
this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded 
off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes methods for the preparation, marking 
and measuring of fabric specimens ( except textile floor coverings ) 

•Rules for rounding ofiF numerical values ( revised ) . 

3 



IS : 10099 - 1982 

and garments for use in tests for determining dimensional change 
( for example, dimensional change on washing, dry cleaning, soaking 
in water, or steaming ). 

2. PRINCIPLE 

2.1 Specimens are selected so as to be as representative as possible of the 
sample. Pairs of reference marks are placed on the fabric specimen or 
garment and the distance between the two marks of each pair of 
reference marks is measured before and after specified treatment. 

3. TERMINOLOGY 

3.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definition shall apply. 

3.1 Dimensional Change Percent — The decrease or increase in 
dimensions ( that is, in length or width or both ) after subjecting the 
fabric to the prescribed test, expressed as a percentage of the corres- 
ponding dimensions before such test. 

4. APPARATUS 

4.1 Rule — not less than 750 mm length, preferably with an engraved, 
bevelled edge, marked in millimetres, for measuring fabric specimens. 

4.2 Flexible Steel Rule or Fibre-Glass Tape — marked in milli- 
metres, for measuring garments. 

4.3 Suitable Means of Marking Reference Points — such as: 

a) Indelible ink; 

h) Fine threads, of colour contrasting with the fabric; 

c) Heated wire, with which small holes may be made ( for thermo- 
plastic fabrics only ); and 

d) Staples, with the measurements made from the point of entry of 
the staple into the cloth. Indicate on the cloth which end of the 
staple is used for measurement. 

4.4 Flat Table of dimensions such that the complete article being 
tested can be laid flat for measurement. 

5. ATMOSPHERIC CONDITIONS FOR CONDITIONING AND 
TESTING 

5,1 The test specimens shall be conditioned ( after pre-conditioning ) to 
moisture equilibrium in standard atmosphere at 65 ± 2 percent RH and 
27 ± 2°G temperature as given in IS : 6359-1971*, before making 
measurements. 



♦Method for conditioning of textiles. 



IS : 10099 - 1982 

6. FABRIC SPECIMENS 

6.1 Selection and Number 

6.1.1 Selected specimens should be as representative as possible of the 
sample. Take sufficient specimens to cover the width of the fabric, but 
do not cut specimens from within 1 m ( preferably not within 3 m ) of 
either end of a piece or where possible, within 75 mm of either selvedge. 

6.2 Dimensions 

6.2.1 Gut uncreased specimens, each measuring not less than 500 X 
500 mm with edges parallel to the length and width of the fabric. In 
the case of fabrics less than 650 mm in width, full-width specimens may 
be used and measurements made by agreement between the interested 
parties. 

Note— If there is a possibility of the fabric unravelling during the test procedure, 
overlock the edges of the specimen with dimensionally stable thread. Specimens 
treated in this way shall be cut slightly larger than the specified dimensions. 
Specimens of weftknitted fabrics shall be of double-thickness and the edges shall be 
overstitched loosely using dimensionally stable thread. 

6.3 MARKING 

6.4.1 Place the specimen on the measuring table and make not fewer 
than three pairs of marks on it in both the length and width directions, 
using a suitable means ( see 4.3 ). The distance between the two marks 
in each pair shall be not less than 350 mm and no mark shall be less 
than 50 mm from the edges of the specimen. The pairs of marks 
shall be displaced from each other in such a manner as to yield a 
representative measure of the whole specimen ( see Fig. 1 ). 

6.4 Pre-conditioning and Conditioning 

6.4.1 Expose the specimen to the pre-conditioning atmosphere specified 
in IS : 6359-1971* and then expose the specimen to the standard atmos- 
phere for testing textiles, as specified {see 5) until it reaches equilibrium 
and until it is brought to approximately constant mass. 

6.5 Method of Measuring Before Treatment 

6.5.1 Conduct all measurements in the standard atmosphere { see 5 ) 
proceeding as follows for the measurement of each specimen. 

6.5.2 Lay the specimen flat on the measuring table and remove 
wrinkles gently by hand without stretching the specimen. Lower the 
measuring rule vertically on to the specimen to ensure that it is flat. 
Measure the distance, to the nearest 1 mm, between the two marks of 
each pair of reference marks. 

'Method for conditioning of textiles. 



IS : 10099 - 1982 



SO 



SfO 



so 



too- 



so 



•4 so 



BOO 



MARKING OP SPECIMEN FOR FABRIC OF 
WIDTH SSOmm OR GREATER 



•ISO- 



SO 



r — ^ 



50 



MARKING OF SPECIMEN FOR FABRIC OF 
WIDTH LESS THAN SSOmm 

Dimensions given are minimal, expressed in millimetres. 

Fig. 1 Marking of Fabric Specimens 



6.6 Treatment of Specimen 

6.6.1 Subject the specimen to the required test method ( according to 
the conditions specified in the appropriate Indian Standards or by 
agreement between the interested parties ). 

6.7 Method of Measuring After Treatment 
6.7.1 Proceed as indicated in 6.4 and 6.5. 



IS : 10099 - 1982 

7. GARMENTS 

7.1 General 

7.1.1 The measurements listed are comprehensive. Not aj] rray be 
necessary as their selection will c epend on the type and style of garment. 
In all cases the exact sites measured when testing garments shall be 
specified in the test report. 

7.1.2 Unless otherwise arranged by agreement, make measurements as 
specified in the relevant clause. If, for example, it is required to relate 
changes in dimensions to changes in the maiked sizes of a garment, it 
may be necessary to make more measurements than those specified in this 
standard. Such additional measurements shall be trade, by a^^reeirent, 
at the specific parts of the garment which customarily denote the size of 
the garment. Examples of this application are: 

a) the sizing of shirts by the collar size, that is, the length between 
the outer edge of the button hole and the centre of the button; 

b) the sizing of brassieres by the circumference of ihe boc'y of the 
level of the diaphragm plus various tolerances dependent on cup 
size, which are of the order of 125 mm. 

Any modification of this type shall be noted when reporting the 
results. 

7.1.3 When it is required to determine the dimensional change of the 
cloth of a garment as distinct from the dimensional change at seams and 
hems which may change more or less than the cloth, additional measure- 
ments shall be taken in the direction of the warp ( wales ) and of weft 
( courses ) between maiks located as far as is practicable from seams and 
hems [ set Fig. 2 (a) to 2 (c) ]. 

7.2 Instructions Relating to all Garments 

7.2.1 Make length and width measurements between specific points, 
preferably at seams or between points where seams meet. The positions 
on the garment at which the measurements are to be made shall be 
marked by one of the methods described in 4.3. It the garment design 
is complicated, it may be helpful to provide a diagram showing the 
measuring points. 

7.2.2 Where linings are present which are considered to be of impor- 
tance to the function of the garment, measure thes^e in positions corres- 
ponding to those at which the garment was measured. 

7.2.3 First-precondition and then condition the garment as given in 
<».4. 



IS : 10099 - 1982 




Fig. 2(a) Marking of Garment when Measuring Dimensional 
Change of the Cloth 




*% 




V' 




/ 


1 

1 

il 



Fig. 2(b) Marking of Vest when Measuring Dimensional 
Changes of the Cloth 

8 



IS : 10099 - 1982 




Fig. 



MARKING ON 
BACK SIOE 



2(c) Marking of Brief when Measuring Dimensional 
Change of the Cloth 



7.2.4 Place the garment flat on the table for measuring ( see 4.4 ). 

7.2.5 Measure the distance between the two marks of each pair of 
marked positions without stretching or tensioning the garment in any way, 
using the flexible steel rule or fibre-glass type ( see 4.2 ) and measuring to 
an accuracy of at least 5 mm, and where practicable, to an accuracy 
of I mm. 

7.2.6 Measure the width or circumference with the garment closed and 
ensure that the buttons of buttoned garments are fully home in the 
buttonholes. 

7.2.7 Measure elasticated garments or portions of garments in the 
relaxed state. 

7.3 Specific Positions for Measurements — The following measur- 
ing positions are recommended but not all positions are necessarily rele- 
vant to all garments of a particular type. Corresponding measurements 
shall be made on both halves of the garment under examination, for 
example, both sleeves. 

7.3.1 Jacket-Like Garments {for Example, Dresses, Coats, Pullovers, Pyjamas, 
Shirts, Vests ) — The measuring positions are the following: 

7.3.1.1 Length of neck-band. 

7.3.1.2 Vertical length from lowest point of armhole to bottom of 
garment. 



IS : 10099 - 1982 

7.3.1.3 Vertical length of front ficm junction of shoulder seam and 
neck seam to bottom of garment. 

7.3.1.4 Vertical length of centre back from neck to bottom of 
garment. 

7.3.1.5 Length of underarm seam(s) from armhole to bottom of 
sleeve. 

There may be two such seams if the sleeve is made ficm upper and 
lower sleeve sections: both shall be measured. 

7.3.1.6 Length of shoulder seam from sleeve seam to neck. 

7.3.1.7 Where applicable, the garment shall be folded as shown in 
Fig. 3 with the widest part of the bust section, along the fold. Measure 
the fold between side seams, or between sleeve seams, or between panels,, 
depending on the construction of the garment. 




Fio. 3 Method of FotDiNG Garment 



7.3.1.8 Width across back between sleeve seams measured at a dist- 
ance halfway between centre-back neck and lowest point of aimhole, or 
width of yoke from sleeve seam to sleeve seam. 

7.3.1.9 Width or circumference of garment at not more than three 
places at stated distances from the centre-back neck. 

7.3.1.10 Width or circumference of sleeve from junction of side and 
sleeve seams at right angles to sleeve length. 

7^.1.11 Width from front sleeve seam junction with the body to the 
back sleeve seam junction with the body, as shown in Fig. 4. 

7.3.1.12 Width or circumference or sleeve halfway between lowest 
point of armhole and bottom of sleeve. 

7.3.1.13 Width or circumference at cuff or bottom of sleeve. 

10 



IS : 10099 - 1982 



Fig, 4 Measurement Described in 7.3.1.11 

T 3.2 Trousers {for example. Briefs , Pants, Swim, Trunks) — The 
measuring positions are the following. 

7.3.2.1 Length from top to junction of leg seams at front. 

7.3.2.2 Length from top to junction of leg seams at back. If seams 
are curved, measure round the curves. If there is more than one seam 
measure all seams. 

7.3.2.3 Inside leg from crotch to bottom of legs. If leg length is 
short, measure from the bottom of one leg to the bottom of the other leg 
via the crotch. 

7.3.2.4 Width at, or circumference of, waist. 

7.3.2.5 Maximum width or circumference between top and crotch. 

7.3.2.6 Width or circumference of bottom of leg. 

7.3.2.7 Width or circumference of leg halfway between crotch and 
bottom ( omit if leg length is short ). 

7.3.2.8 Width or circumference of top of leg. 

7.3.3 Boiler Suits ( Jump Suits ), Coveralls, Bib-and-Brace Overalls, 
Combinations, One-Piece Swim Suits. 

7.3.3.1 These can be accommodated by combining the categories 
jacket-like garments ( 7.3.1 ) and trousers ( 7.3.2 ) but where applicable: 

a) replacing 7.3.1.3 with "by length from centre-front neck to crotch 
seam or end of opening", and 

b) replacing 7.3.1.4 with "by length from centre-back neck to 
crotch seam". 

11 



IS : 10099 - 1982 

7.3.4 Girdles — The measuring positions are the following: 

7.3.4.1 Length at a minimum of three places. 

7.3.4.2 Width or circumference at top. 

7.3.4.3 Width or circumference at bottom. 

7.3.4.4 Width or circumference halfway down garment. 

7.3.5 Pantie-girdle Categories 

7.3.5.1 These can be accommodated by combining the categories 
trousers ( 7.3.2 ) and girdles ( 7.3.4 ). 

7.3.6 Brassiers — These include the appropriate portions of foundation 
garments, dresses, nightgowns, vests or slips, swim suits, with or without 
padded or pre-shaped bra sections. If adjustable shoulder straps are 
fitted, preferably adjust the sliders to give the longest possible strap or 
mark the position of the sliders. The measuring positions are the 
following. 

7.3.6.1 Circumference of bottom of bra or 'bra section'. 

7.3.6.2 Total length of top edge of bra or bra section. It may be 
necessary to include the strap length in this measurement for certain types 
of garment. Examples of types which require measurement round the 
top to include the strap length on the side nearer the neck occur when the 
straps are: 

a) not adjustable, but incorporate elastic sections as shown in Fig. 
5 and 6. 




Fig. 5 Bra with Non-adjustable Strap 




Fig. 6 Bra with Non-adjustable Strap 
12 



IS : 10099 - 1982 

b) adjustable but made from a continuous piece of fabric which may- 
or may not be elastic, as shown in Fig. 7. 




Fig. 7 Bra with Adjustable Strap made from a Continuous Fabric 

With garments of these types of construction, the circumference of the 
armhole, including the strap length on the side nearer the arm, should 
also be measured. 

7.3.6.3 Length at centre back. 

7.3.6.4 Length at centre front. 

7.3.6.5 Depth at armhole seam or at seams adjacent to the armhole, 

7.3.6.6 Distance between the tops of cups while the garment lies on 
the table. This is suitable for padded or pre- shaped types. 

7.3.6.7 Length of each cup seam. 

7.3.6.8 Length round curve of cup when folded garment is flat on 
table. This is suitable for garments without padding or pre-shaped 
sections. 

7.3.6.9 Length of shoulder straps. 

7.3.7 Skirts — The measuring positions are the following. 

7.3.7.1 Length from waist to bottom, including waistband if one is 
present, taken at seams and midway between seams. 

7.3.7.2 Width at or circumference of waistband. 

13 



IS : 10099 - 1982 

7.3.7.3 Width or circumference at not less than three places at slated 
distances from top ec'ge or from bottom edge of waistband if present. For 
flared and bias-cut skirts ( see Fig. 8 ), four additional measuiements are 
required, preferably on each panel. 

7.3.7.4 Length from waist to bottom, including waistband if one is 
present, taken at seams and midway between seams. 

7.3.7.5 Length from waist to bottom, including waistband if one is 
present, taken at seams and midway between seams, marked length 
parallel to the warp direction. 

7.3.7.6 Length from waist to bottom, including waistband if one is 
present, taken at seams and midway between seams, marked length 
parallel to the weft direction, 

7.3.7.7 Length from waist to bottom, including waistband if one is- 
present, taken at seams and midway between seams, marked length at 45* 
to the warp direction ( MANDATORY MEASUREMENT ). 




Fig. 8 Flared and Bias-Cut Skirts 

7.3.8 Hosiery ( Socks Stockings ) — The measurement of hosiery and 
especially of tights is diflBcult and the procedure should be agreed bet- 
ween the interested parties. It is suggested that for socks and stockings- 
the following measurements should be made as indicated in Fig. 9, 

14 



IS ! 10099 - 1982 

cr ^ — ^ 

Fig. 9 Measurement of Socks 

7.3.8.1 Length of leg from top of heel. 

7.3.8.2 Length of foot from heel to toe. 

7.3.8.3 Width of leg midway between top and heel. 

7.3.8.4 Width of foot midway between heel and toe. 

7.3.9 Hats and Caps — The measuring positions are the following. 

7.3.9.1 Length of band. 

7.3.9.2 Length of seams. 

7.3.9.3 Width of band. 

7.3.9.4 Overall diameter ( inside dimension ). 

7.3.10 Gloves 

7.3.10.1 Overall length. 

7.3.10.2 Length of thumb seam(s). 

7.3.10.3 Length along centre line of middle finger. 

7.3.10.4 Width of palm, above the thumb joint. 

7.3.10.5 Width across wrist at hem. 

It may be found helpful to use a template. 

7.4 Treatment of Garment 

7.4.1 Subject the garment to the required test method, repeat the pro- 
cedure described in 7.2.3 to 7.2.8 making the same series of measurement 
as conducted unier 7.3. 

8. EXPRESSION OF RESULTS 

8.1 The changes in dimensions shall be recorded separately as percentages 
of the original value. The changes in the recorded measurements may 
be reported as well as, or instead of, the changes in dimensions. A plus 
sign { ■{- ) shall be used to indicate elongation and a minus ( — ) to 
indicate shrinkage. 

15 



IS : 10099 - 1982 



AP PENDIX A 

( Clause 0.4 ) 
RECOMMENDED SI UNITS FOR TEXTILES 



Si. 

No. 


Characteristic 


SI 


Unit(s) 


AfPllCATlON 




t*^ — ■ 










Unit(s) 


Abbreviation(s) 




(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


I) 


Length 


Millimetre 


mm 


Fibres 






Millimetre, 


mm, cm 


Samples, test specimens 






centimetre 




( as appropriate ) 






Metre 


m 


Yarns, ropes, cordage, 
fabrics 


2) 


Width 


Millimetre 


mm 


Narrow fabrics 






Centimetre 


cm 


Other fabrics 






Millimetre, 


mm, cm 


Samples, test specimens 






centimetre 




( as appropriate ) 






Centimetre, metre cm, m 


Carpets, druggets, DURRIK 










( as appropriate ) 


3) 


Thickness 


Micrometre 
( micron ) 


ttm 


Delicate fabrics 






Millimetre 


mm 


Other fabrics, carpets, felts 


4) 


Linear density 


Tex 


tex 


Yarns 






Millitex 


mtex 


Fibres 






Decitex 


dtex 


Filaments,' filament yarns. 






Kilotex 


ktex 


Slivers, ropes, cordage 


5) 


Diameter 


Micrometre 
( micron ) 


!tm 


Fibres 






Millimetre 


mm 


Yarns, ropes, cordage 


6) 


Circumference 


Millimetre 


mm 


Ropes, cordage 


7) 


Threads in fabric: 






Woven fabrics ( as- 
appropriate ) 




a) Lengthwise 


Number per 
centimetre 

Number per 
decimetre 


ends/cm 
ends/dm 






b) Widthwise 


Number per 
centimetre 

Number per 
decimetre 


picks/cm 
picks/dm 




8) 


Warp threads in 
loom 


Number per 
centimetre 


endsfcm 


Reeds 


9) 


Stitches in knitted 
fabric: 






Knitted fabrics ( as. 
appropriate ) 




a) Lengthwise 


Courses per 
centimetre 

Courses per 
decimetre 


courses/cm 
courses/dm 


I 




b) Widthwise 


Wales per 
centimetre 

Wales per 
decimetre 


wales/cm 
wales/dm 





16 



IS : 10099 - 1982 



No. 


Chabactebistic 


SI Unit(s) 

A 




Application 


Unit(s) Abbreviation(s 


r 




(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 




(5) 


10) 


Stitch length 


Millimetre 


mm 




Knitted fabrics, made-up 
items 


11) 


Mass per unit area 


Grams per square 
metre 


g/m^ 




Fabrics 


12) 


Mass per unit length 


Grams per metre 


g/m 




Fabrics 


13) 


Twist 


Turns per centi- 
metre 
Turns per metre 


turns/cm 

turns/ m 


1 

J 


Yarns, ropes, cordage ( as 
appropriate ) 


14) 


Test or gauge length 


Millimetre, centi- 
metre 


mm, cm 




Fibres, yarns and fabric 
specimens ( as appro- 
priate ) 


15) 


Breaking load 


Millinewton 
Newton 


mN 

N 




Fibres, delicate yarns 
( individual or skeins ) 

Strong yarns ( individual 
or skeins ), ropes, 
cordage, fabrics 


16) 


Breaking length 


Kilometre 


km 




Yarns 


17) 


Tenacity 


Millinewton per 
tex 


mN/tex 




Fibres yarn ( individual 

or skeins ) 


18) 


Twist factor or twist 
multiplier 


Turns per centi- 
metre X square 


. turns/cm 
X i/tex 



19) Bursting strength 



20) Tear strength 



21) 
22) 



Pile height 
Pile density 



23) Elastic modulus 



root of tex 

Turns per metre turns/m_ ^ 

X square root X V'tex 1 

of tex J 

Newton per N/cm^ 
square centi- 
metre 

Millinewton, mN 

Newton N 

Millimetre , mm 

Mass of pile yarn g/m*/mm 

in grams per pile 

square metre height 

per millimetre 

pile height 

Millinewton per mN/tex/ 
tex per unit unit 
deformation deform- 

ation 



J. Yarns ( as appropriate ) 



Fabrics 



Fabrics ( as appropriate ) 



Carpets 
Pile carpets 



Fibres, yarns, strands 



17 



