**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10058 (1985): Forceps, Fixation, Graefe's Pattern 
(Modified) [MHD 5: Ophthalmic Instruments and Appliances] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS :1005a- 1985 

( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

Indian Standard 

SPHCJFICATJON FOR 

FORCEPS, FIXATION, GRAEFE'S 

PATTERN ( MODIFIED ) 



(First Revision) 



UDC 613 472 4 i 617-7 089-72 




© Copjnght 1«B6 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MAMAK BHAVAM* 9 BAHADUR SlIAII ZAFAR MARC 

NEW DELHI Il0ni»2 

Gr2 ^ffi/ ISeS 



IS : 10058 • 1985 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

FORCEPS, FIXATION, GRAEFE'S 

PATTERN ( MODIFIED ) 

(First Revision) 

Eye Surgery Instruments Sectional Committee, CPDC 27 

Chairman Representing 

Db K. Lali. Ministry of Health ( DGHS ), New Delhi 

Members 

Db p. M. Kapoor ( Alternate to 
Dr K. Lall ) 
Shei Abya Muni Arya Muni & Co, Amritsar 

Col M- S. Bopaeai Ministry of Defence ( DGAEMS ), New Delhi 

Db D. B. ChaNdba Department of Health and Family Welfare, Govern- 

ment of U.P., Lucknow 
Db Daljit Singh Department of Health and Family Welfare, Govern- 

ment of Punjab, Chandigarh 
Db Char an jit Lal ( Alternate ) 
Shbi K. H. Gandhi Ministry of Defence ( DGT ) 

Shbi V. K. Bajpai ( Alternate ) 
Db A. K. Gupta Delhi Administration ( M & PH Department ), Delhi 

Shbi P. Y. Kai.ei>ki:b Kalelker Surgical Industries, Bombay 

Shbi Y. P. Kalelker ( Alternate ) 
Db A. Kbishna Mubthy Department of Health and Family Welfare, Govern- 

ment of Karnataka, Bangalore 
Db H. Thimmaiah ( Alternate) 
Shbi A. K. Maiti Directorate of Industries, Government of West 

Bengal, Calcutta 
Shr] S. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shbi K. Manivannan Directorate of Industries, Government of Haryana, 

Chandigarh 
Db I. P» Singh Pabmab ( Alternate ) 
Db D. L. Mabia Directorate of Medical Education and Research, 

Bombay 
Db S. N, Patel ( Alternate 1 ) 
Db S. K. Dhawan ( Alternate II ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1986 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XlV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



ISvim)5S-1985 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shbt G. S. Mathartt Indo-German Surgical Corporation, Bombay 

Shri MoHiNDBB Lal Punjab Surgical Instruments Manufacturers & 

Suppliers Association, Jalandbar 
Shbi Stjbit Mukbrji H. Mukerji & Banerjee Surgicals Pvt Ltd, Calcutta 

Shut Sudhib Mukebji ( Alternate ) 
Dr R, MrjSALAPFA Redby Municipal Administration Departmentj Government 

of Andhra Pradesh^ Hyderabad 
Shbi C. Nabayana Rao Bharat Electronics Ltd, Machilipatnam 

Shri A. M. Jose ( Alternate ) 
Shsi Sxjrinder Nayyab Hansraj Nayyar ( Surgical ) Pvt Ltd, A.mritsar 

Shbi Vijay Nayyar ( Alternate ) 
Shbi B. L. Pahwa Surgical Manufacturers & Traders Association, 

' Delhi 
Shbi Balwant Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. L. Pahwa Speedway Surgical Company, Delhi 

Shbi Vipin Pahwa ( Alternate ) 
Shbi K, L. Pahwa Speedway Surgical Company, Ludhiana 

Shri P. S. Pahwa ( Alternate ) 
0B S. Sathiayakesan Health and Family Welfare Department, Govern- 

ment of Tamil Nadu, Madras 
Pbof ( Dr ) P. Siva Reddy All India Ophthalmoiogical Society, Madras 

Db J. AOABWAL ( Alternate ) 
Dr K. S. Stjbrahmaniam Health and Family Welfare Department, Govern- 

ment of Kerala, Trivandrum 
Dr M. V. JoHiT ( Aliernate ) 
Shbi P. R. T. TnuLAsmaAM Surgical Instruments Plant, IDPL, Madras 

Shbi A. K. ThanikaohaIiAM ( Alternate) 
Db a. S. Sethi, Director General, ISI ( Ex-offisio Member ) 

Direciof ( Gonsr Prods & Med Instrs ) 

Secretary 

Shbi M. K. Bhatia 
Deputy Director ( Consr Prods & Med Instrs ), Ibl 



IS : 10058 - 1985 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

FORCEPS, FIXATION, GRAEFE'S 

PATTERN ( MODIFIED ) 

{First Revision) 



0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 23 November 1985, after the draft finalized by 
the Eye Surgery Instruments Sectional Committee had been approved 
by the Consumer Products & Medical Instruments Division Council. 

0.2 This standard was first published in 1981. The present revision has 
been taken up to include certain modifications in order to bring the 
specification in line with the modern manufacturing practices. In the 
revised standard the non-functional dimensions have been rounded off. 
The tolerance for the functional dimensions have been modified keeping 
in view the present manufacturing technique. A clause on sampling 
and inspection has been added. The test methods have been brought in 
line with the test methods covered in other similar standards of eye 
surgery instruments, 

0,3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS : 2-1960*, The number of significant places retained in the rounded 
off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

!•! This standard covers requirements for Graefe's pattern fixation 
forceps used in eye surgery. 

2. SHAPE AND DIMENSIONS 

2.1 The shape and dimension shall be as shown in Fig. 1. 

2.2 Joint — Shall conform to requirements given in 5of IS : 3642-19781. 

♦Rules for rounding oif numerical values {first revision ). 
fGeneral requirements for surgical instruments {first revision ). 

3 



1 4a* 



TEETH 



ENLARGED VIE¥/ X 
OF CLOSED POSITION 



r t*5 



Sl/iTASLE GROOVES FOR 
R HOLD 



\ BETTER 







*This dimension will vary depending upon the number of teeth. 

All dimensions in millimetres. 



tfi 



O 

o 

en 

09 



CO 
00 



Fig. 1 Forceps, Fixation, Graefe's Pattern 



IS : 10058 - 1985 

2.3 Teeth — Shall conform to requirements given in Section 4 of 
IS : 3642-1978* combination being I in 2, 2 in 3, 3 in 4, or 5 in 6. 

2.4 The tolerance on dimensions of working ends shall conform to ^fine' 
class of deviation and the tolerance for remaining dimensions shall 
conform to ^medium' class of deviations of IS : 2102 ( Part 1 )-1980t. 

3. MATERIAL 

3.1 The material for forceps shall be stainleis steel conforming to 
designation 30Cr 13 of IS : 6603-1972$. 

4. REQjUIREMENTS 

4.1 The forceps shall be finished smooth and shall be free from burrs, 
pits, cracks, and other surface defects. 

4.2 The edges shall be even and rounded off. 

4.3 The teeth shall be clear, clean and match perfectly, 

4.4 The forceps shall be matt finished and passivated. 

5. HARDNESS 

5.1 The forceps shall be hardened and tempered to give a hardness of 
400 to 460 HV, 

6. TESTS 

6*1 Test for Engagement of Teeth — A latex sheet of 0'05 mm 
thickness conforming to IS : 5430-1981§ be stretched over the tip of the 
fingers. The stretched latex sheet shall then be gripped by the teeth of 
the forceps and pulled to a distance of 6 mm. The forceps shall hold the 
latex sheet firmly without any tendency to slipping and the latex sheet 
shall not be punctured or damaged. 

6.2 Flexibility Test — The arms of the forceps after maximum closure 
by manual compression shall not take a permanent set and the teeth 
shall continue to engage and disengage accurately and properly. 

6.2.1 By the application of force at the tip of one arm, the arm of 
the forceps shall be deflected in a plane at right angles to the plane of 
the arm, by 20 mm as measured at the tip of the forceps. On release of 
the force no permanent set shall be observed. The test shall be repeated 
on the other arm. 



♦General requirements for surgical instruments {Jirst nvision ). 

tGeneral tolerances for dimensions and form and position: Part 1 General tolerances 
for linear and angular dimensions ( second revision ). 

^Specification for stainless steel bars and flats. 

§Specification for ammonia preserved concentrated natural rubber latex {Jirst 
revision). 

5 



IS : 10058 - 1985 

6.3 Corrosion Resistance Test — The forceps shall satisfy boiling and 
autoclaving test as specified in IS : 7531-1975*. 

6.4 Load Closure Test — The load 215 g ± 20 g when applied at a 
distance of 45 mm from the tips of the jaws shall make the teeth to just 
interlock, 

7. SAMPLING AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 

7.1 A suitable sampling scheme and criteria for acceptance is given in 
Appendix A. 

8. MARKING 

8.1 Each instrument shall be marked with the manufacturer's name, 
initials or recognized trade-mark and the word 'stainless steel' or letters 
^SS'. 

8.1.1 The forceps may also be marked with ISI Certification Mark. 

NoTK — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regu- 
lations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard 
conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the require- 
ments of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality 
control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer. ISI 
marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity to that 
standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the 
use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors^ 
may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 

9. PACKING 

9.1 As agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 



APPENDIX A 

( Clause 7.1 ) 

SAMPLING AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 
FOR FORCEPS 

A-1. LOT 

A-1.1 In any consignment, all the forceps produced from the same 
material, shape and dimensions under similar conditions, shall consti- 
tute a lot. 

A-2. The number of forceps to be selected from each lot shall depend 
upon the size of the lot and shall be in accordance with col 1 and 2 of 
Table 1. 



♦Method for boiling and autoclaving test for corrosion resistance of stainless steel 
surgical instruments. 

6 



IS : 10058 - 1985 



TABLE 1 


SCALE OF SAMPLING 




( Clause A-2 ) 




Lot Size 




Sample Size 


(1) 




(2) 


Up to 15 




2 


16 „ 50 




3 


51 „ 150 




5 


151 and above 




8 



A-2.1 These forceps shall be selected from the lot at random and in 
order to ensure the randomness of selection, procedures given in 
IS : 4905-1968* may be followed. 

A-3. NUMBER OF TESTS AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 

A-3-1 All the forceps selected at random in accordance with col 1 
and 2 of Table I shall be tested for hardness, requirements load closure, 
engagement of teeth, flexibility, and corrosion resistance. The lot shall be 
considered as conforming to these requirements if none of the forceps in 
the sample is found to be defective in any oi these tests. 



♦Methods tor random sampling. 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS) 

Base Units 

Unit 



Quantity 
Length 
Mass 
Time 
Electric current 

Thermodynamic 
temperature 

Luminous intensity 

Amount of substance 

Sapplementary Units 

QlTANTlTy 

Plane angle 
Solid angle 

Derived Units 

Quantity 

Force 

Energy 

Power 

Flux 

Flux density 

Frequency 

Electric conductance 

Electromotive force 

Pressure, stress 



Symbol 



metre 


m 


kilogram 


i^g 


second 


s 


ampere 


A 


kelvin 


K 


candela 


cd 


mole 


mol 


Unit 


SYMBOIi 


radian 


rad 


steradian 


sr 


Unit 


Symbol 


newton 


N 


joule 


J 


watt 


W 


weber 


Wb 


tesla 


T 


hertz 


Hz 


Siemens 


S 


volt 


V 


pascal 


Pa 



Definition 



1 N - 1 kg.m/s^ 
1 J = 1 N.m 
1 W - I J/s 
1 Wb - 1 V.s 
1 T - 1 Wb/m*^ 
1 Hz - 1 c/s (s-i> 
1 S = 1 A/V 
1 V = 1 W/A 
I Pa - 1 N/m'- 



