**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10042 (1981) : Code of practice for site investigations 
for foundation in gravel-boulder deposit [CED 43: Soil and 
Foundation Engineering] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

SITE INVESTIGATIONS FOR FOUNDATION 

IN GRAVEL-BOULDER DEPOSIT 



UDC d24'l3l 31 : 624-1505 J ; 69 032 2 : 006-76 




© Copyright im 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

UAMaK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADLR SKAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW PELUl 11^001 



18:10042-1981 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

SITE INVESTIGATIONS FOR FOUNDATION 

IN GRAVEL-BOULDER DEPOSIT 

Soil Engineering and Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee, BDC 23 

Chairman Representing 

Dr Jagdish Narain University of Roorkee, Roorkce 

Members 
Additional Director, IRI Irrigation Department, Government of Bihar, Patna 

Additional Director Research Ministry of Railways 
(F.E.), RDSO 
Deputy Director Research 
( Soil Mech ), RDSO ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. D. Agarwal Public Works Department, Government of Uttar 

Pradesh, Lucknow 
Dr B. L. Dhawan ( Alternate ) 
Prof Alam Singh University of Jodhpur, Jodhpur 

GoL Avtar Singh Engineer-in-Ghicf 's Branch, Army Headquarters 

Lt-Col V. K. Kanitkar ( Alternate ) 
Chief Engineer ( D&R) Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab 

Chandigarh 
Dr G. S. Dhillon ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. C. Dandavate The Concrete Association of India, Bombay 

Shri N. C. Duggal ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. G. Dastidar In Personal Capacity (5 Hmgerford Slreety I2jl, 

Hungerford Court, Calcuita-700017) 
Dr G. S Dhillon Indian Geotechnical Society, New Delhi 

Director, IRI Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar 

Pradesh, Roorkee 
Shri A. H. Divanji Asia Foundations and Construction (P) Ltd, Bombay 

Shri A. N. Jangle ( Alternate ) 
Dr Gopal Ranjan Institution of Engineers ( India), Calcutta 

Dr Gopal Ranjan University of Roorkee, Roorkee 

Shri S. Gupta Gemindia Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri N. V. De Sousa ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. S.Jain G. S.Jain & Associates, Roorkee 

Shri Vijay K. Jain ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1982 
INDLVN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be denied to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



tS : 10042 - 1981 

( Continued from page I ) 

Members Representing 

Shri a. B. Joshi Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Deputy Director ( CSMRS ) {Alternate ) 
Col M. V. Kayerka Ministry of Defence ( R&D ) 

Shri V. B. Ghorpade ( Alternate ) 
Shri O.P. Malhotra Public Work* Department, Chandigarh Adminis- 

tration, Chandigarh 
Shri D. R. Narahari Central Building Research Institute (CSIR), 

Roorkee 
Shri B. G. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri T, K. Natrajan Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 

Dr G. V. Rao Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 

Dr K. K. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Research Officer ( B & RRL ) Public Works Department, Government of Punjab, 

Chandigarh 
Shri K. R. Saxena Engineering Research Laboratories, Government of 

Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad 
Secretary Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi 

Deputy Secretary ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Sivaouru Roads Wing (Ministry of Shipping and Transport) 

Shri D. V. Sikka ( Alternate ) 
ShriK. S. Srinivasan National Buildings Organization, New Delhi 

Shri Sunil Berry ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Subramanyam Karnataka Engineering Research Station, Krishna- 

raj asagar 
Superintending Engineer Public Works Department, Government of Tamil 
( P&DG ) Nadu, Madras 

Executive Engineer ( SMRD ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. Raman, Director General, ISI ( Ex^officio Member) 

Director ( Civ Engg ) 

Secretary 
Shri K. M. Mathur 
Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI 

Site Exploration and Investigation for Foundation 
Subcommittee, BDC 23 : 2 

Shri V.S. Aggarval Central Building Research Institute, CSIR, Roorkee 

Shri M.P.Jain ( Alternate ) 
Dr Alam Singh University of Jodhpur, Jodhpur 

Deputy Director Research Ministry of Railways 

(PE), RDSO 
Assistant Director Research 
( Soil Mech ), RDSO ( Alternate) 
Director (CSMRS ) Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Deputy Director ( CSMRS ) ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 1 9 ) 



IS : 10042 « 1981 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

SITE INVESTIGATIONS FOR FOUNDATION 

IN GRAVEL-BOULDER DEPOSIT 

0, FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 30 November 1981, after the draft finalized by the Soil Engineering 
and Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil 
Engineering Division Council. 

0,2 The advent of the large river valley projects in India necessitated the 
erection of heavy industrial complexes in river or old river courses. It will, 
therefore, be necessary to determine foundation conditions in respect of 
the following before a design can be finalized: 

a) Sequence and extent of overburden soil underlain by boulder- 
gravel soil deposit to be affected by the proposed work; 

b) Nature of matrix of boulders; 

c) The amount and state of packing of the boulders, their nature 
(rounded or otherwise) and the size of the boulders present; 

d) Whether the boulder-gravel is lying in the matrix of material or 
otherwise; 

e) Nature of each stratum if there is any change, ground water table 
and its possible effects on foundation material; and 

f) General information on geology and surface drainage, etc. 

This standard has, therefore, been formulated to cover these aspects, 
as methods adopted for soils {see IS: 1892-1979*) will not be applicable in 
such cases. 

0.3 In the formulation of this standard, considerable assistance has been 
given by Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee. 

0,4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, express- 
ing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS : 2-1960t. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 

♦Code of practice for subsurface investigations for foundations {first revision ) . 
fRules for rounding off numerical values ( revised). 



IS : 10042 - 1981 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This code deals with the subsurface investigation in relation to design 
of foundations for single and multistoreyed buildings, overhead water tanks, 
piers and abutments of bridges in boulder-gravel deposits. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions in addition 
to those given in IS : 2809-1972* shall apply. 

2.1 Boulder— Boulder Test ( BBT ) — A block cut out of the boulder soil is 
sheared under a normal load. 

2.2 Concrete — Boulder Test (CBT) — A cast in situ concrete block on 
boulder soil and pushing the block laterally under a normal load. 

2.3 Depth on Foundation — The minimum vertical distance between the soil 
surface and base on the foundation. 

2.4 Dynamic Cone Penetration Test (DCPT) — A subsurface sounding 
used to ascertain the soil strata. 

2.5 Residual Shear Strength — Minimum shear strength exhibited by the 
soil 

3. SYMBOLS 

3.1 For the purpose of this standard and unless defined in the text, the 
following letter symbols shall have the meaning indicated against each: 

Bf = width of the strip foundation, side of square foundation, dia- 
meter of circular foundation expressed in metres, 

^a = allowable soil pressure corresponding to 12 mm or 25 mm 
settlement in tonnes/m*, 

To = residual soil strength in tonnes/m^ 

5a = allowable settlement for a structure in cm, 

N" ~ cummulative number of blows corresponding to a depth Dq in m, 

Dc = depth of penetration in cm, 

Be = diameter of cone in cm, and 

Yc == natural unit weight of the soils in tonnes/m^. 



♦Glossary of terms and symbols relating to soil engineering {first revision), 

4 



IS : 10042 - 1981 
4. GENERAL 

4.1 The type of material found in such locations as river beds or old river 
courses falls neither in the class of soils nor rocks but in the form of gravel- 
boulders. 

The average size of the boulder is larger than 300 mm and it is gene- 
rally mixed with fine ( 4'75 — 20 mm ) to coarse (20 — 80 mm ) gravels. 
Soils v^ith a large quantity of gravel-boulders deposit pose several problems 
in investigation. The presence of large sized particles precludes the sampl- 
ing by the usual methods of soil sampling in the true sense. Tests on 
disturbed samples are likely to yield unrehable results, as the natural 
arrangements of the grains and matrix material are never achieved by 
recompaction. The best results are obtained by properly chosen field tests. 

4.2 Nature of the Deposit — The deposits commonly called boulder deposits 
may be of fluvial or glacial origin. Generally, there exists some filler 
material which may be sand, silt or clay mixed with fine to coarse gravels. 

4.3 Behaviour Under Load — The performance of such deposits under load, 
a matter of intelligent guess, is generally made on conservative side leading 
to high cost of foundations. The behaviour of boulder deposits under high 
loads also depends upon the size and quantity of gravel-boulder and also 
the nature and amount of the filler material. If the filler material exists 
only in the interstices of the boulder ( see Fig. lA), the behaviour depends 
upon the state of packing of the boulders, nature ( rounded or otherwise ) 
and the size of the boulder; on the other hand if the boulder exists in the 
matrix of the filler material ( see Fig. IB ), the behaviour will be governed 
by the size, quantity and distribution of the boulder in the filler. When 
the filler material is absent, the load carrying capacity is high and the com- 
pressibility is low. When there exists a filler material, there is an initial 
compression stage followed by low compression stage when the load carry- 
ing capacity is high. If the gravel lies in the matrix of the filler material, 
the behaviour is governed by the nature of the filler material and it is likely 
to reduce the compressibility. The boulder soil unlike ordinary soil shows 
certain peculiar characteristics when the boulder proportion is large ( > 30 
percent ); the deposit shows an initial rapid compression followed by a stage 
where the compression decreases considerably as the boulders take over the 
load carrying function ( see Fig. 2 ). In such cases, it is of advantage to 
have the allowable load well in excess of the load at which initial compres- 
sion occurs, thereby reducing deformations at design loads. 

However, in the other situations when the boulder-gravel quantity is 
small ( < 30 percent ), normal methods of interpretation ( IS : 1888-1982* ) 
will be used ( see Fig. 3, curves A, E and G ). 

♦ Method of load tests on soils ( second revision ) . 



IS : 10042 - 1981 



'• * ^'. ''^* ■.' OVERBURDEN SOIL' ^\ \ . •' * 




1A FILLER MATERIAL EXISTING IN THE 
INTERSTICES OF BODLDER/CRAVEL 

OVERBURDEN SOIL* 




.■c^^-^m^ms 



IB BOULDER GRAVEL EXISTING IN THE 
MATRIX OF THE INTERSTITIAL MATERIAL 

Fig. 1 Gravel-Boulder Soil Stratum 

4.4 Influence of Filler Material — If the cobbles/boulders exist in the matrix 
of the JSller material, properties of the matrix govern the overall behaviour, 
though the presence of gravel/boulder shall reduce the compressibility of 
the matrix material to some extent ( see Fig. 3 and 4 ). However, if this 
material exists only in the interstices of the boulders, the boulders being 
in contact (see Fig. lA), the behaviour is essentially governed by the 
boulder. 

5. METHODS OF INVESTIGATIONS 

5.1 Field Test — The method of exploring by open trial pits consists in 
excavating trial pits at the site and thereby exposing the sub-soil strata 
thoroughly, enabling identification and classification of the soil. The pit size 



18:10042-1981 



U 



12 



10 



CO 
CO 
LU 





















/< 


/ 








/ 


^ 


^60cm 






/ 


I 


/^ 


— 90 cm 






^ / 


\ 








© 


Z' 


y 


p' V 


^120cm 




Km\ 


^ 











5 10 15 20 25 30 

DEFORMATION , mm 

Natural density « 2'21 gm/cc 
Grain > 5 cm = 57% 
Max grain size » 350 mm 
Grain > 12 mm = 32% 

Fig. 2 Load Settlement Curves Material Lies in the 
Matrix of Boulders 

shall be sufficiently large ( 5 x 5 m ) but not less than 2 x 2 m. The depth 
of excavation is 4 to 6 m. The sides of the pit shall be sloped or the shored 
excavation shall be employed to check against any possible slides in case of 
deep excavation when the depth of the boulder stratum is large ( 10 to 15 m ), 
with large size of the pit ( 15 x 15 m ). Large pits are necessary when 
heavy structures are founded on bouldery soils. 

5.2 Soil Classification and Sampling — Due to the native nature of the 
material, the undisturbed sampling is not possible for identiflqation and 



IS : 10042 - 1981 




10 



Fig. 



20 



30 40 SO 

DEFORMATION, mm 



60 



3 Load Settlement Curves (Boulder Lies 
IN THE Matrix of Material ) 



testing purposes. During the course of excavation of the technical pit, dis- 
turbed samples shall be collected at about 1 m depth or change of strata for 
identification and grain size analysis, 

Note — These samples shall also be used to determine the moisture content of 
the material and the overall proportion of material in the boulder soil strata. 

5.3 In Situ Density — The measurement of natural density shall be made 
by water replacement method/sand replacement method. For this purpose, 
a pit of known dimensions is excavated ( 1 m x 1 m x 50 cm). 

The entire excavated soil is carefully collected and weighed with the 
help of a spring balance ( 100 kg capacity ). The pit is then be covered with 
a polyethylene sheet large enough to touch the sides and the base of the pit. 
The pit is filled with known volume of water up to the surface of the pit 
[IS : 2720 (Part XXXIII )-I971* ]. The density is calculated from the 
known mass and volume of the soil. Sometimes dry clean sand may also 

♦Methods of test for soils: Part XXXTII Determination of the density in-place by the 
ring and water replacement method. 

8 



IS : 10042 - 1981 




5 10 15 20 25 30 

DEFORMATION mm 



Test 
No. 


Interstitial Material 
<5 cm% 


Remarks 


B 
Bi 


47 
40 


All footings 
90 cm* 


B. 


60 




Ba 


57 




B4 


58 





Fia. 4 Influence of Inter mri^L M\terial on the Load Carrying 
Capacity of Boulder Soils 

9 



IS: 10042 -1981 



be well adopted to measure the volume of the excavated soil. The 
collected soil may also be used for grain size analysis and soil classifica- 
tion. 

5,4 Dynamic Cone Penetration Test ( DCPT) — This test [ IS : 4968 ( Part I ) - 
1976* J shall be performed, if the aggregate size is not larger than 100 to 
120 mm. The test set-up is similar to that in the standard penetration 
test, the standard SPT Sampler being replaced by a push fit cast iron cone 
with 60° apex angle and base diameter 62*5 mm.. Use of cone of this size 
ensure su£acient clearance ( 11-36 mm) with the standard A drill rod and 
helps in reducing friction on the rod ( see Fig. 5 ). The cone is driven 







DRILL ROD 



NIPPLB 



VSmm CLEARANCE 
12-5 



CONE 



All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 5 Diagrammatic Sketch of 62*5 mm Dia Cone 



♦Method for subsurface sounding for soils: Part I Dynamic method using 50 mm cone 
without bentonitc slurry {first revision ). 



10 



18:10042-1981 

from the level of the footing with a 65 kg hammer dropping from a height 
of 750 mm. The number of blows for every 15 cm shall be counted and a 
plot between cumulative number of blows N' and D/Bc is prepared. A 
typical plot is shown in Fig. 6. 

Note — In order to avoid damage to the equipment, driving may be stopped when 
the number of blows for the last 30 cm is 100. Assembly of the equipment shall be in 
accordance with Fig. 2 of IS : 4968 ( Part II )-I976*. 



40 



CUMULATIVE NO. OF BLOWS ( N } 
80 120 160 200 240 



260 



320 



360 



10 



20 



30 4 



40 



SO 



60 



;o 





t 














• 




, 


H 
















\ 


D/B^^ 3 6 












D 


^»C 


V 


^J^ 


















0V^ 


^ 


^^ 


















V 


s^ 





















X 


^ 



Fig. 6 Typical Plot of Depth/Width (D/Bc) Ratio 
AND Cumulative no. of Blows (N") 

5.5 Load Test on Cast in-sittt Footing— Considering the large size of 
aggregates involved, large sized footing need to be used in the test. Steel 
plates are not of much use because of seating difficulties. Best results are 
obtained with cast in-situ concrete blocks or with precast blocks, set with 
fresh mortar, so that there is perfect bond between the soil and the block, 

♦Method for subsurface sounding for soils: Part II Dynamic method using cone and 
bentonite slurry {first revision ). 



11 



IS : 10042 . 1981 

The size of the footing shall be such that it will span over several boulders 
so as to mobilize group action under load. To satisfy this criterion, the 
minimum size of the footing shall not be less than 10 times the average grain 
size to a minimum of 150 cm. 

Note — The maximum limit may be increased depending upon feasibility. 

The footing shall be loaded using dead load Kentledges platform 
through a hydrauUc jack ( 100 tonnes capacity ). The deformation shall be 
measured with 4 dial gauges (0001 mm ) in accordance with IS : 1888- 
1982"^. For each increment of load, the deformation shall be noted after 
intervals of 1, 4, 10, 20, 40 and 60 min and thereafter at hourly intervals. 
Each load increment shall be kept for not less than Ih or up to a time when 
the rate of deformation gets reduced appreciably ( to a value of 0*02 mm/ 
min ). The deformation shall be taken as the average of 4 dial gauges 
readings. The next increment of load shall then be applied and the obser- 
vation repeated. The test should be continued till a deformation of 50 mm 
is reached or till failure occurs, whichever is earlier. A minimum of eight 
load increments shall be applied to obtain a well defined load settlement 
curve. Typical graphs are shown in Fig. 2. A typical set is shown in 
Fig. 7. 

If needed, rebound observation may be taken while releasing the load 
in a similar manner. 

5.6 In-Situ Shear Test — The test best suited for such type of deposit to 
determine strength parameter is in situ shear test. It consists in shearing a 
block of sample under a given normal load. The in situ test is a simple 
form of laboratory shear box test. The interpretation of test results causes 
difficulties, as identical samples are not likely to be available for many tests 
under different loads. Two types of tests have been found suitable for such 
deposits. 

5.7 Boulder-Boulder Test ( BBT )t — It consists in cutting a block of 
boulder soil and slowly confining it into a rigid well-designed steel former 
[ IS : 7746-1975J and IS : 2720 (Part XXXIX/Sec 1 )-1977§ ]. This soil 
block is sheared under a normal load. Then the shear ( kg/cm^ ) is plotted 
against displacement ( mm ). 

5.8 Concrete-Boulder Test ( CRT )t — This test, similar to that recommen- 
ded in IS : 7746-I975J consists in casting a reinforced block and pushing it 
laterally under a given normal load. 

•Method of load tests on soils { second revision ). 

fThe minimum number oi tests depends on the area over which the structure has to 
come and uniformity of strata. However, in the normal case a minimum of two tests are 
required. 

{Code of practice for in situ shear test on rock, 

§Methods of tests of soils; Part XXXIX Direct shear test for soils containing gravel, 
Section 1 Laboratory test. 

12 



D^OCPTH Of^ FOOtMG 
a« %nt OF FOOTING 




STRATA ® 



STRATA (D 



1 . Overburden soil 



2. 


Boulder deposit 


3. 


Cast in^situ concrete footing 


4. 


M.S. plates 


5. 


Hydraulic jack 


6. 


Dial guage stand 


7- 


Datum bar 


8. 


Magnetic base 


9. 


Dial gauge rod 


10. 


Dial gauge 


II. 


Proving ring 


12. 


Spacer plates 



13. Main girder 

14. Flexible pipe 

15. M.S. channel /wooden sleepers 

1 6. Column 

17. Pressure indicator 

18. Jack handle 

1 9. Pump for the jack 

20. M.S. plates/wooden sleepers 

2 1 . Loading bags 

22. Loading material ( excavated soil) 

23. M.S. sheets 

24. Sleepers 

25. Girder 



W 



O 

o 



00 



Fig. 7 In-situ Full Size Footing Test 



IS : 10042 - 1981 

For a shear stress, the corresponding displacement is noted and the 
shear stress { kfg/cm^ ) — displacement ( mm ) curve is plotted. This test 
has the advantage that it eliminates the need for a steel former and an un- 
disturbed soil block. The concrete blocks used for load test, can also be 
used for this purpose. Precast concrete blocks may also be used after they 
are seated with mortar on the foundation bed. 

The residual shear stress ( xo ) values obtained from both types of 
tests (BBT and CBT) are the same. The test set-up for both types of 
tests and sample results are shown in Fig. 8, 9 and 10. 

5.9 Sample Size — In the case of Boulder-Boulder Test (BBT), the minimum 
size of the sample shall not be less than 10 times the average size of 
boulders or 120 x 120 cm, whichever is less. The height of the sample shall, 
however, be kept at 30 to 45 cm, depending upon the average aggregate 
size. The minimum size of the concrete block in CBT shall also be 
120 X 120 cm in plan and the thickness may be kept as 30 cm. 

Note — The size may be increased, depending upon feasibility IS: 2720 (Part 
XXXIX/Sec 2)-1979». 

5.10 Application of Normal Load — The sample in BBT or the concrete 
block in CBT shall be subjected to a normal load equal to the overburden 
pressure or the anticipated normal load. The load on the sample may be 
placed in the form of 20 kg concrete cubes^ Alternatively, sand bags of 
known weights may also be used. However, the intensity of the normal 
load shall not exceed two times the shear strength of the soil, to avoid a 
bearing capacity type of failure. 

Note — For the sample likely to be sheared under high normal loads for the angle 
of shearing resistance, if considered, the procedure outlined in IS : 7746-1 975t and 
IS : 2720 ( Part XXXIX/Sec 2 )-1979* may be followed. 

6. ALLOWABLE SOIL PRESSURE 

6.1 Load Test — The allowable soil pressure from one or two load tests 
shall be obtained as outhned in 4.3 and 5.5. These load tests shall be used 
to confirm results from other large number of less expensive tests such as 
dynamic cone penetration tests ( DCPT ) and in situ shear tests, (BBT or 
CBT), particularly when the site under investigation is large. 

6.2 Dynamic Cone Penetration Test — The results of dynamic cone penetra- 
tion test (IS :4968 (Part I)- 1976 J ) shall be used to compute allowable 

♦Methods of test for soils: Part XXXIX Direct shear test for soils containing gravel, 
Section 2 In situ shear test, 

fCode of practice for in situ shear test on rock, 

JMethod for subsurface sounding for soils: Part I Dynamic method using cone and 
bcntonite slurry ( first revision ) . 

14 




120 



280 



10. Hydraulic jack 20 T capacity 

1 1'. Wooden sleeper support for jack 

12. Steel plates 

13. Wooden sleepers 



1. Datum bar 

2. Magnetic holder 

3. Dial gauge 

4. Angle iron stiffeners 
5'. Steel shear box 

6. Boulder gravel sample 

7. Filler material 

8. Steel plates 

9. 20 T capacity proving nng ^^^ ^.^^^^.^^^ ,, ,,„,i^etres. 

FIG. 8 TEST SET-UP SHOWING DETAILS OF BOULDER-BOULDER TEST 



14. Flexible pipe j k^^ 

15. Steel weights/concrete blocks/sand bag 

16. Pump for the jack 

17. Handle for the jack 



W 



S 



0\ 




1. Datum bar 

2. Magnetic base 

3. Stand for dial gauge 

4. Dial gauge 

5. Concrete sample 

6. Proving ring 

7. Hydraulic jack 20 T capacity 



H. Wooden sleeper support for jack 

9. Steel plates 

10. Wooden slipper 

1 1. Flexible pipe 

12. Handle for jack 

13. Pump for jack 

14. Steel weights/concrete blocks/sand bags 



{/) 



00 



All dimensions in centimetres. 

Fig. 9 Test-Set-up Showing Details of Concrete Boulder Test 



18:10042-1981 




10 15 20 25 30 35 iO 45 50 55 

HORIZONTAL DISPLACEMENT, mm 

Fig. 10 Comparison of BBT & CBT Shear Stress 

pressure ( q^, ) from the following equation when the maximum grain size is 
not exceeding 100 mm. 



2-54 iDB, \ 



■(1) 



•(2) 



In Equation ( 1 ), the value of allowable deformation 5'a ( cm ) and the 
footing width 5f (m) shall be assumed in accordance with the type of 
structure to be constructed. The values of N^ and D shall be taken from 
Fig. 6. 

6.3 In-Situ Shear Tests — The allowable pressure {q^,) shall be computed 
from the residual shear stress values ( ^) obtained from in situ shear tests 
( BBT or CBT ) using the following equation: 

^a = (a ) To I -^ 

where 
X ~ constant, 6-25 for a deformation of 12 mm and 8 for a defor- 
mation of 25 mm. The value of the width of the footing {B) 
shall be assumed depending upon the situation and type of 
structure. 

7. LABORATORY TEST 

7.1 Soil Sampling — Owing to the nature of the bouldery soil, undisturbed 
sampling is not possible and hence only disturbed samples form the techni- 
cal pit shall be collected from different elevations. The quantity of samples 

17 



IS : 10042 . 1981 

from each depth shall be large enough ( 1 000 kg ) to reflect the actual soil 
proportions. The material above particle size 80 mm shall be separated 
and its grading established in the field itself. However, the material below 
particle size 80 mm shall be collected in suitable containers ( gunny bags ) 
and properly labelled immediately, as given in Appendix E of IS : 1892- 
1979*. 

7.2 Grain Size Analysis — The only laboratory test conducted on disturbed 
samples of bouldery soils is the grain size distribution using appropriate 
IS sieves to separate boulder/cobbles/gravel (> 4* 75 mm) and matrix 
( <4*75mm). 

7.2.1 From the known quantity of the samples collected, and the grain 
size analysis, the overall proportion of the boulder/gravel shall be collected. 
This shall be used in deciding if the boulder/gravel lies in the matrix of 
material or vice versa. 



*Gode of practice for subiurface investigations for roundations {first revision ), 

18 



IS : 10042 - 1981 

(Continued from page 2 ) 

Members Represen ting 

Director, PWDRI Public Works Department, Government of Uttar 

Pradesh, Lucknow 
Executive Engineer ( Design ) V Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 
Executive Engineer ( SMRD ) Public Works Department, Government of Tamil 

Nadu, Madras 
Executive Engineer ( CD ) ( AUernate ) 
Shri M. D. Nair Associated Instruments Manufacturers ( India ) 

Private Ltd, New Delhi 
Prof T. S, Nagaraj ( Alternate) 
Shri T. K. Natarajan Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 

Lt-Gol K. M. S. Sahasi Engincer-in-Chief's Branch, New Delhi 

Shri A. K. Ghaturvedi ( Alternate) 
Shri S. K, Shome Geological Survey of India, Calcutta 

Shri P. N. Mehta ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Sivaguru Roads Wing, Ministry of Transport 

Shri P. K. Thomas ( Alternate) 
Superintending Engineer ( IP ), Irrigation Department, Government of Maharashtra, 
Nagpur Bombay 



19 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS (Si UNITS) 



Base Units 

Quantity 

Length 

Mass 

Time 

Electric current 

Thermodynamic 
temperature 

Luminous intensity 
Amount of substance 



Unit 


$ymbo\ 


metre 


m 


kilogram 


kg 


second 


s 


ampere 


A 


kelvin 


K 


candeia 


cd 


mole 


mol 



Supplementary Units 

Quantity 
Plane angle 
Solid angle 



Unit 


Symbol 


radian 


rad 


steradlan 


sr 



Derived Units 

Quantity Unit 

Force newton 

Energy joule 

Power watt 

Flux weber 

Flux density tesia 

Frequency hertz 

Electric conductance Siemens 

Electromotive force volt 

Pressure, stress pascal 



Symbol 




Definition 


N 




N - 1 kg. mis' 


J 




J - 1 N.m 


W 




W - 1 J/s 


Wb 




Wb - 1 V.s 


T 




T - 1 Wb/m» 


Hz 




Hz- 1 c/s(s-M 


S 




S - 1 A/V 


V 




V - 1 W/A 


Pa 




Pa - 1 N/m» 



