**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 101-4-2 (1989) : Methods of Sampling and test for paints, 
varnishes and related products, Part 4: Optical tests, 
Section 2: Colour [CHD 20: Paints, Varnishes and Related 
Products] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



a^yj i iw&*<m&a rsi>frgamsBP 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 101 ( Part 4/Sec 2 ) : 1989 

Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2004 > 

METHODS OF 

SAMPLING AND TEST FOR PAINTS, 

VARNISHES AND RELATED PRODUCTS 

PART 4 OPTICAL TESTS 
Section 2 Colour 

( Third Revision ) 

First Reprint AUGUST 1995 
UDG 667-613:535-68 



© BIS 1990 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

J ul > 19 90 Price Group 2 



Paints and Allied Products Sectional Committee, CDC 8; and Panel for Methods of 
Test, CDC 8:6:4 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( Third Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 
30 June 1989, after the draft finalized by the Paints and Allied Products Sectional Committee had 
been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 

This standard is one of a series of standards on methods of sampling and test for paints and allied 
products. For standardized visual comparison; it is necessary to have an observer with normal 
colour vision, reproducible illumination and viewing conditions. 

In the preparation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from ISO : 3668-1976 
'Paints and varnishes — Visual comparison of the colour of paints' prepared by the International 
Organization for Standardization ( ISO ). 

This standard supersedes clause 11 of IS : 101-1964 'Methods of test for ready mixed paints and 
enamels ( second revision) 9 . 



IS101(Part4/Sec2) : 1989 



Indian Standard 



METHODS OF 

SAMPLING AND TEST FOR PAINTS, 

VARNISHES AND RELATED PRODUCTS 

PART 4 OPTICAL TESTS 
Section 2 Colour 

( Third Revision ) 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes two methods for 
comparison of colour, namely, (a) visual com- 
parison, and (b) based on spectrophotometer. 

2 VISUAL COMPARISON 

2.1 Principle 

The colour of films of paints or related products 
is compared against a standard using either 
diffused daylight or artificial daylight in a 
standard booth. 

2.2 Illumination For Colour Matching 

2.2.1 General 

For visual colour matching, either natural 
northern daylight or artificial daylight may be 
used. Because the quality of natural daylight is 
variable and observers' judgements are likely to 
be effected by surrounding coloured objects, 
therefore, for referee purposes closely controlled 
artificial illumination in a colour-matching 
booth shall be used. The observer shall wear 
clothing of a natural colour, and no strongly 
coloured surfaces, other than panels under test, 
shall be permitted in the field of view. 

2.2.2 Natural Daylight Illumination 

Diffuse daylight, preferably from partially 
cloudy north sky in the northern hemisphere 
and a partially cloudy south sky in the southern 
hemisphere, and not reflected from any strongly 
coloured object, such as a red brick wall or 
green tree, shall be used. Illumination shall be 
uniform over the area in which test panel are 
displayed and at a level of at least 2 000 lx. 
Direct sunlight shall be avoided. 

2.2.3 Artificial Daylight Illumination by Means of 
Colour Matching Booth 

It shall be an enclosure from which external 
light is excluded and which is illuminated by a 



light source giving a spectral power, distribution 
falling in the test panel, approximating to that 
of CIE standard Illuminant D65. 

The method for checking the closeness of con- 
formity of the spectral distribution of the 
lighting device to CIE standard illumination 
D65 shall be as specified in IS 11472 (Part 1 ) : 
1985 'Illuminant for colour matching and colour 
appraisal'. The level of illumination at the 
colour matching position shall be between 1 000 
and 4 000 lx, a figure towards the upper end of 
the range being desirable for dark colours. The 
interior of a booth for general use shall be pain- 
ted with matt black. To secure an appropriate 
surrounding field for colour comparison the 
table surface in the booth shall be covered by a 
neutral grey panel, its luminance factor being 
chosen to be similar to that of the samples to be 
compared. A diffusing screen shall normally be 
used to avoid the reflection of an image of the 
lamp from the test panel. The spectral distribu- 
tion properties of the lightening device shall 
include the spectral transmission of the screen. 
The manufacturer of the artificial light source 
shall disclose the number of running hours 
during which his product can be expected to 
conform to this standard. 

2.3 Observer 

Observers must be selected carefully because a 
significant proportion of people have defective 
colour vision. An Ishihara test will reveal severe 
defects, but for selecting critical colour matches, 
more sensitive tests, for example the Farnsworth 
test or anomaloscope measurements, are 
desirable. If an observer wears glasses to correct 
his vision, these must have a uniform spectral 
transmission throughout the visible spectrum. 
As colour vision changes significantly with age, 
observers over 40 years of age shall be tested 
using an anomaloscope or a method whereby 
the observer is requested to choose the best 
match from a metameric series of colours. 

To avoid eye fatigue effects, pastel or com- 
plementary colours shall not be viewed 



1 



IS 101 (Part 4 Sec 2) : 1989 



immediately after strong colours. When com- 
paring bright saturated colours, if a decision 
can not be made rapidly, the observer shall look 
away for some seconds at the neutral grey of 
the surrounding field before attempting of 
further comparison. 

The quality of visual judgement falls off severly 
if the observer works continuously. Test periods 
of several minutes during which no colour 
matching is attempted shall therefore, be taken 
frequently. 

2.4 Test Panels and Reference Standards 

2.4.1 General 

Both test panels and reference colour standards 
shall be flat and preferably at least 150 mm X 
100 mm in size, but in no case less than 120 mm 
X 50 mm. Panels of length 120 mm, when 
viewed from a distance of 500 mm, subtend an 
angle at the eye of about 10° in accordance with 
GIE recommendation. Suitable materials for 
test panels are tinplate, hard aluminium, steel 
or glass, which comply with IS 101 (Part 1/ 
Sec 3) ; 1986 'Preparation of panels'. 

2*4.2 Reference Standards 

Only colour standards of satisfactory colour 
permanence shall be used for reference standards. 
Wherever possible, the reference standards shall 
be of the same size as the test panels and shall 
have closely similar gloss and surface texture. 

2.4.3 Preparation and Coating of Test Panel 

Prepare the test panel as specified and, where 
appropriate in accordance with IS 101 (Part 1/ 
Sec 3 ) : 1986, The panel shall be coated twice, 
to give not more than 35 microns dry film 
thickness, by a closely specified or agreed 
method, because the method of application 
and film thickness may effect the colour 
considerably. If the test panel is to be com- 
pared against a standard paint, it shall be 
coated with the paint or system under test and 
a similar panel coated with the standard paint 
or system. The method of application and the 
applied film thickness shall be, as closely as 
possible, identical. 

2.4.4 Drying of Test Panel 

Dry (or stove) the panel for the specified time 
and under the specified conditions and, unless 
otherwise specified, condition in the standard 
atmosphere for a minimum of 16 h, with free 
circulation of air and not exposed to direct 
sunlight. 

2.5.4 Thickness of Coating 

Determine the thickness, in micrometers, of the 
dry coating by the method specified, using one 



of the procedures specified in TS 101 (Part 3/ 
Sec 6) 'Film thickness (under preparation)'. 

2.5 Procedure for Colour Matching 

2.5.1 Visual Method 

The panels may be viewed either in natural 
daylight or in a colour-matching booth, as 
detailed below: 

a) Viewing on natural daylight — View the 
panels at an angle which minimizes gloss 
difference, for example, from a nearly 
normal direction so that the specular 
reflection does not reach the eye. 

b) Viewing in a colour-matching booth — View 
the panels at an angle of 45° with 
illumination of an angle of 0°. 

View the two panels, or the panel and the 
reference colour standard, either under natural 
daylight [ as in 2.5.1(a) ] or in artificial daylight 
in the colour-matching booth [2.5.1(b)]. Place 
the panels side by side touching or overlapping 
and in the same plane, at a distance of about 
500 mm from the eyes. Compare the colour of 
the paint film prepared from the material under 
test with that of the reference colour standard 
or of the film prepared from the standard paint. 
To improve accuracy of comparison, compare 
the colours with the positions of the panels 
reversed from time to time. In case of certain 
finishes, such as metallic finishes, the method of 
viewing shall be agreed to between the 
interested parties. When films of different levels 
of gloss are to be compared the gloss level of the 
shade examined shall be similar. 

2.5.2 Referee Method 

In case of dispute, comparisons shall be made 
in artificial daylight, conforming to ClE 
standard Illuminant D65, unless an alternative 
light source has been agreed to between the 
interested parties. 

3 SPECTROPHOTOMETRY METHOD 

3.1 This instrument may be used as an aid to 
objective measurement of colour and whiteness 
and for recording reflectance characteristics of 
reflecting surfaces that are to be examined 
under normal diffused daylight. Any suitable 
photo-electric reflectometer using three filters, 
amb^r, green and blue, along with ICI* 
illuminant G may be used for this purpose. The 
combined response of the light source, filter and 
the photocell used in the instrument shall 
conform to the following requirements: 

K A Ei Jaskn « ZE C 
JT B Ei TkskA - XE C 
Kq Ei Tcsko — TEc 



* International Commission on Illumination. 



IS101(Part4/Sec2):1989 



where 



Ei is the spectral distribution of the 
lamp source; 

/a, 7b, and 7c are the spectral trans- 
mission of the amber, blue and 
green filters, respectively; 

s is the spectral response of the 
photocell to equal energy; 



A* A -8Tb, Kq> Ica> Ab and kc are constants 
that are either furnished with every 
instrument or eliminated by the 
recommended procedure of using 
the instrument; and 

ZE C , XEz and TE C are the blue, 
amber and green responses respecti- 
vely, of ICI Standard Observer 
Illuminant C. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications maybe reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also 
reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that 
no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users 
of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by 
referring to the latest issue of *BIS Handbook' and 'Standards Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. GDC 8 ( 9325 ) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 (Common to all offices) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg / 331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 . \ 331 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola J 37 84 99, 37 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 \ 37 86 26, 37 86 62 



Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 f 60 38 43 

60 20 25 



{: 



Southern : C I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 6001 13 f 235 02 16, 235 04 42 

\ 235 15 19, 235 23 15 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) f 632 92 95, 632 78 58 

BOMBAY 400093 \ 632 78 91, 632 78 92 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. 
JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



