**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  10030  (1981) :  Methods  for  sensory  evaluation  of  milk 
powder  [FAD  19:  Dairy  Products  and  Equipment] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y>K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


Indian  Standard 


IS  :  10030 -19S1 

(Reaffirmed  2002) 


METHOD  FOR 
SENSORY  EVALUATION  OF 
MILK  POWDER 


UDC    637143;  543-92 


INDIAN  STANDARDS  INSTITUTION 
MANAK  BHAVAN,  9  ItAHADL'R  SttAH  ZAFAR  M\KC; 
_^         NEW  DELHI   tlOOO? 


Fihuary  1982 


IS  :  10030  -  1981 

Indian  Standard 

METHOD  FOR 

SENSORY  EVALUATION  OF 

MILK  POWDER 

Sensory  Evaluation  Sectional  Committee,  AFDC  38 

Chairman 

Shui  M.  R.  Srinivasan 
415  IV.E.A.,  Karol  Bagh,  JVew  Delhi 

Members  Representing 

Agbioultueal       Marketing     Directorate  of  Marketing  &   Inspf  ction  (  Ministry 

Adviser   to    the  _  Govkrnmknt  of  Rural  Reconstruction  ),  Faridabad 

OF  India 

SuRi  T.  V.  Mathkw  (  Alternate ) 
Shri  D.  S,  Chadha  Central  Committee  for  Food  Standards  (  DGHS  ), 

Ministry  of  Health  &  Family  Welfare,   New 
Delhi 
Shri  M.  R.  Chandrasekhaba  Protein  Foods  &  Nutrition  Development  Associa- 

tion of  India,  Bombay 
Shri  Om  P.  Dhamija  Export  Inspection  Council  of  India,  Cochin 

Director  or  Research  Coffee  Board,  Bangalore 

CuPTASTER.  (  Alternate ) 
Shrima-ji  Haksimrat  Kaur  Gill       The  Punjab  Dairy  Development  Corporation  Ltd, 

Chandigarh 
Shri  V.  S.  Govindauajan  In     personal     capacity    {2701,    1st    Main    Road, 

Mysore  ) 
Shri  K.  L.  Gupta  Tea  lioard,  Calcutta 

Dk  S.  K.  Gupta  National     Dairy     Research      Institute     ( ICAR ), 

Karnal 
Dr  B.  N.  Mathur  (  Alternate) 
Maj  JaSdeep  Stnoh  Defence  Food  Research  Laboratory,  Mysore 

Shui  N.  Srinivasalu  (  Alternate) 
Shri  E,  K.  Jayanarayanan  Mohan  Meakin  Ltd,  Ghaziabad 

Dii  D.  K.  JjfA  Yczdi  DisfiJieries,  Mysore 

Col  R.  K.  Kochhar  Quarter    Master   General's    Branch,  Army  Head- 

quarters, New  Delhi 
Lt-Col  P.J.  Cheriak  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  Vittal  Mallya  United  Breweries  Ltd,  Bangalore 

Shri  N.J.  Menon  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  N.  Jandarana  Mf.kon  McDowell  &  Go  Ltd,  Shertally 

Dr  a.  G.  Naik  Kukaue  Surnan  Food  Consultants,  New  Delhi 

(  Cnntimied  on  page  2  ) 


©  Copyright  1982 
INDIAN  STANDARDS  INSTITUTION 

This  publication  is  protected  under  the  Indian  Copyright  Act  (  XIV  of  1957  )  and 
reproduction  in  wiicle  or  in  part  by  any  means  except  with  written  permission  of  the 
publisher  shall  be    deemed  to  be  an   infringement  of  copyright   under  the    said  Act 


IS:  10030-1981 

{^Continued from  page    I  ) 

Members  Representing 

Shui  S.  N.  Pandby  All  India  Distillers  Association,  New  Delhi 

Shri  B.  L.  Khanna  (  Alternate  ) 
Db(Shrimati)  p.  Pushpamme         College    of    Home     Science,      Andhra    Pradesh 

Agricultural  University,  Hyderabad 
Dr  (  Shrimati  )  P.  Geebvani 
( Alternate  ) 
Dr  K.  G.  Raghttveeb  Central   Food  Technological   Research    Institute, 

(GSIR),  Mysore 
Shri  G.  K.  Ramnath  Brooke  Bond  India  Ltd,  Bangalore 

Brig  P.  G.  S.  Sagera  Technical  Standardization  Committee    (  Ministry 

of  Agriculture  ),  New  Delhi 
Shri  Y.  G.  Vaidya  Naarden  India  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  S.  B.  Sulb  (  Alternate) 
Shri  R.  Walter  Food  Specialities  Ltd,  Moga 

Shri  A.  K.  Roy   (  Alternate ) 
Shri  T.  Pcrnanandam,  Director  General,  ISI  (  Ex-qfficio  Member) 

Director  (  Agri  &  F  ood  )  (  Secretary ) 

Sensory  Evala  ation  of  Dairy  Products  Subcommittee ,  AFDG  38  :  2 

Convener 

Db  S.  K.  Gtjpta  National     Dairy     Research     Institute     (ICAR), 

Kamal 

Members 

Agricultural      M  arketing     Directorate  of  Marketing  &  Inspection  (  Ministry 
AnvisEB   TO    THE    Government  of  Rural  Reconstruction),  Faridabad 

OF  India 

Dereotor  of  Laboratorieb  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  Ghunni  Lal  All  India  Mawa  Vyapar  Sangh,  New  Delhi 

Shri  B.  M.  L.  Garo  Punjab       Dairy        Development        Corporation, 

Chandigarh 
Shri  V.  S.  GoviNDARAJAN  In     personal     capacity     {2701,     1st    Main   Road, 

Mysore  ) 
Shri  K.  S.  Gunnery  Delhi  Milk  Scheme,  New  Delhi 

Da  S.  G.Jain  Punjab  Agricultural  University,  Ludhiana 

Da  V.  Jaswanta  Rao  The      Andhra      Pradesh      Dairy      Development 

Corporation  Ltd,  Hyderabad 
Shri  G.  E.  Obbd  Kaira  District  Cooperative  Milk  Producers'  Union 

Ltd,  Anand 
Da  L  M.  Patkl  Gujarat   Cooperative  Milk  Marketing  Federation 

Ltd,  Anand 
Da  M.  PuBNAOHANDRA  Rao  Andhra  Pradesh  Dairy  Development  Corporation, 

Hyderabad 
Shri  K.  Madhava  Rao  ( Alternate  ) 
Dr  a.  K.  Roy  Food  Specialities  Ltd,  Moga 

Shbi  M.  M,  Sobti  Haryana   Dairy   Development   Corporation    Ltd, 

Chandigarh 
Shri  R.  K.  Ghhabra  (  AlUrnatt  ) 
Shri  R.  K.  Tripathi  Quarter   Master  Generars  Branch,  Army  Head- 

quarters, New  Delhi 
Maj  K,  G.  Naib  (  Alternate  ) 


IS  :  10030  -  1981 

Indian  Standard 

METHOD  FOR 

SENSORY  EVALUATION  OF 

MILK  POWDER 

0      FOREWORD 

0.1  This  Indian  Standard  was  adopted  by  the  Indian  Standards  Institution 
on  31  December  1981,  after  the  draft  finalized  by  the  Sensory  Evaluation 
Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Agricultural  and  Food 
Products  Division  Council. 

0.2  Evaluation  of  milk  powder,  whole  or  skimmed,  on  the  basis  of  its 
sensory  characteristics  plays  an  important  role  in  its  marketing.  Those 
who  buy  milk  powder  give  prime  consideration  to  its  sensory  properties, 
such  as  flavour  and  appearance  for  its  acceptability.  The  sensory 
examination  of  milk  powder  assumes  great  significance  in  this  country 
in  particular,  as  the  procurement  of  skimmed  milk  powder  has  been  taken 
up  in  a  big  way  from  outside  as  well  as  within  the  country  where  it  is 
manufactured  at  feeder-balancing  plants  in  the  flush  season  for  its 
subsequent  reconstitution  during  the  lean  period  so  as  to  maintain  the  milk 
supply  to  the  needy  areas.  This  standard  prescribes  the  method  and 
conditions  for  the  sensory  evaluation  of  milk  powder  for  assessing  the 
quality  of  market  product  and  for  quality  control  by  the  manufacturer. 

0.3  This  standard  is  complementary  to  IS  :  1165-1975*. 

0,4  For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of  this 
standard  is  complied  with,  the  final  value,  observed  or  calculated, 
expressing  the  result  of  a  test  or  analysis,  shall  be  rounded  oflf  in 
accordance  with  IS  :  2-1960*|'.  The  number  of  significant  places  retained 
in  the  rounded  off  value  should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  specified  value 
in  this  standard. 


1.  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  prescribes  conditions,  technique,  method  and  evaluation 
card  for  sensory  evaluation  of  milk  powder. 


♦Specification  for  milk  powder  { second  revision  ). 
fRules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  (  revised). 

3 


IS  :  10030  -  1981 

2,  TERMINOLOGY 

2.1  For  the  purpose  of  this  standard,  the  following  definitions  in  addition 
to  those  given  in  IS  :  5126  (  Part  I)-1969*  and  IS  :  5126  (  Part  II  )-1969t 
shall  apply, 

2.1.1  Acid  —  Flavour  defect  resulting  from  the  growth  of  lactic  acid 
bacteria  in  the  fluid  milk. 

2.1.2  Caked —  A  defect  in  which  powder  forms  hardened  masses  which 
break  into  hard  chunks  having  little  dispersibility  in  water. 

2.1.3  Churned  Particles  —  Masses  of  coalesced  fat  and/or  coagulated 
protein  in  the  reconstituted  milk  which  tend  to  float  and  adhere  to  the 
sides  of  the  containers. 

2.1.4  Feed  —  An  off-aroma  characteristic,  such  as  weedy  and  sulphurous, 
caused  by  certain  feeds  consumed  by  the  milch  animal. 

2.1-5  Foreign  —  Any  objectionable  flavour,  chemical  or  medicinal,  not 
ordinarily  associated  with  good  quality  milk. 

2.1.6  Grainy  —  Visible  insoluble  particles  of  granular  nature  in  the 
reconstituted  product. 

2.1.7  Lumpy  — ■  Non- homogeneous  appearance  due  to  lumps  of  agglome- 
rated powder  particles,  in  powder/ re  constituted  form. 

2.1.8  Neutralizer  —  An  alkaline  flavour  typical  of  alkali  used  to 
standardize  the  acidity  of  milk. 

2.1.9  Oxidized  —  A  flavour  defect  caused  by  fat  oxidation  perceived  as 
cardboardy,  oily  or  tallowy. 

2.1.10  Soiled  —  Unsightly  exterior  defect  on  package  due  to  the  presence 
of  the  product  or  foreign  matter. 

2.1.11  Unclean  —  An  unpleasant  odour  and  taste  suggestive  of  organic 
decomposition  associated  with  persistent  after-taste. 

2.1.12  Unseated  —  Improperly  secured  closure  that  makes  contamination 
of  the  product  possible  without  breaking  or  tearing  a  visible  seal. 

3,  GENERAL  CONDITIONS 

3.1  The  general  conditions  for  sensory  evaluation  of  milk  powder  shall  be 
as  given  in  IS  :  62  73  (Part  I  )-1971J. 


♦Glossary  of  general  terms  for  sensory  evaluation  of  foods  :  Part  X  Methodology. 
fGlossary     of     general     terms    for  sensory   evaluation   of  foods :  Part  II    Quality 
characteristics. 

JGuide  for  sensory  evaluation  of  foods  :  Part  I  Optimum  requirements. 


is  :  i(iG30  -  1981 
4,  PANELISTS 

4.1  Selection  of  Panelists — Persons  with  normal  sensitivity  for  basic 
tastes  and  odours  should  be  chosen  to  form  the  judging  panel.  They 
should  also  be  trained  to  identify  and  estimate  the  desirable  quality 
attributes  as  well  as  defects  in  the  product. 

4.2  Training 

4.2.1  Preparation  of  Milk  Powder  Samples  for  Training  —  A  control 
sample  of  freshly  prepared  m.ilk  powder  representing  ail  the  desirable 
sensory  characteristics  should  be  served  along  with  defects  prepared  as 
follows: 

a)  Acid  —  Reconstitute  fresh  milk  powder  (  as  indicated  under  5.2  ) 
and  inoculate  lactic  starter  at  the  rate  of  one  percent  and 
incubate  at  28  to  30°G  for  2,  6  and  10  hours  to  obtain  different 
degrees  of  acidity. 

b)  Astringent  —  Add  one  percent  solution  of  alum  at  the  rate 
of  0'5,  2*0  and  4*0  percent  to  the  reconstituted  milk  to  attain 
varying  degrees  of  astringency. 

c)  Feed  —  Expose,  in  a  close  chamber,  the  reconstituted  milk  to 
freshly  cut  onion/turnip/lucern  for  1^  3  and  6  hours  so  as  to 
develop  feed  flavour  in  varying  concentrations  in  the  product. 

d)  Metallic  —  Add  0'5  percent  solution  of  ferrous  sulphate  ( prepared 
in  distilled  water  )  to  the  reconstituted  milk  at  the  rate  of  1,  3 
and  5  percent  so  as  to  simulate  different  degrees  of  metallic 
flavour  in  the  product. 

e)  Neutralizer  —  Develop  different  levels  of  lactic  acid  in  the 
reconstituted  milk,  as  in  (a)  above,  and  neutralize  the  acid  to 
about  0'12  percent  with  a  dilute  neutralizer  solution.  Both  lime 
and  soda  can  be  used  as  neutralizers. 

f )  Oxidized  —  For  manipulating  this  defect,  blow  air/oxygen 
through  different  lots  of  reconstituted  milk  for  30,  60  and 
120  minutes. 

g)  Rancid — Homogenize  raw  whole  milk  at  40  to  45*G  and  allow 
it  to  stand  for  about  one  hour  at  37°C  before  heating  it  to  To^'C. 
Mix  the  homogenized  milk  with  reconstituted  milk  at  the  rate 
of  10,  20  and  50  percent  to  obtain  different  degrees  of  rancidity. 

h)  Salty  —  Add  sodium  chloride  to  reconstituted  milk  at  the  rate 
of  0*1,  0'15  and  0*2  percent  so  as  to  develop  salty  taste  in  the 
product. 


IS  :  10030  -  1981 

4.2.2  Procedure  for  Trainmg  —  The  panelists  should  be  familiarized  with 
all  characteristics  of  fresh  inilk  powder  prepared  under  ideal  conditions. 
They  should  also  be  trained  to  detect  and  discriminate  against  likely 
defects  in  the  product  with  respect  to  its  flavour  and  appearance. 

4.2.2.1  A  series  of  20  judgements  should  be  obtained  from  each 
prospective  panelist  for  each  defect  with  known  differences  at  levels 
perceived  as  definite.  To  compensate  for  the  known  day  to  day  variations, 
qualifying  test  should  be  given  for  a  3-day  period.  Those  who  make  an 
acceptable  score  (75  percent  correct )  should  be  selected. 

4.3  The  panelists  shall  be  checked  once  every  three  months  for  their 
acuity  and  consistency. 

4.4  Number  of  Panelists  —  A  minimum  of  five  persons  should  be 
employed.     A  minimum  of  judgements  may  be  taken  using  the  panel. 

5.  SAMPLING,  PREPARATION  AND  PRESENTATION 

5.1  Sampling  —  A  representative  sample  should  be  drawn  from  the 
lot  to  be  examined  ( j<^^  1165-1975*).  Precautions  should  be  exercised 
to  avoid  any  extraneous  contamination  while  drawing,  handling  and 
presenting  the  samples. 

5.2  Preparation  of  Samples  —  The  sample  in  its  original  container 
should  be  placed  on  a  table  for  its  visual  examination.  The  product 
from  the  container  should  be  served  to  the  panelists  in  petri-plates  with 
lids.  Secondly  recostitute  the  dry  milk  by  adding  10  g  of  it,  in  case  of 
non-fat  dry  milk  or  13  g,  in  case  of  dry  whole  milk,  to  100-ml  of  distilled 
water  at  45°G,  followed  by  vigorous  agitation  with  the  use  of  an  electric 
mixer  for  90  seconds.  Take  out  the  milk  in  tasting  glasses  or  beakers 
covered  with  petri-plates  and  allow  it  to  stand  for  30  minutes  before 
serving  to  the  panelists. 

5.3  Amiount  of  Sample  —  Fifty  millilitres  of  the  reconstituted  milk 
should  be  taken. 

5.4  Number  of  Samples  —  The  number  of  samples  in  one  session 
should  not  exceed  5.  When  the  number  of  samples  is  more,  repeat  sessions 
with  3  to  4  hour  intervals. 

5.5  Coding  —  Coding  of  the  samples  should  be  done  as  recommended 
under  7.7  of  IS  :  6273  (  Part  I  )-1971t. 


♦Specification  for  milk  powder  {  second  revision  ). 

fGuide  for  sensory  evaluation  of  foodji :  Part  I  Optimum  requirements. 


IS  :  10030  "  1981 
6.  PROCEDURE  FOR  EVALUATION 

6.1  Technique  of  Evaluation  —  Examine  the  product  in  relation  to  the 

designated  category,  such  as  milk,  skimmed  milk,  spray  dried  milk  powder, 
etc.  The  product  package  is  examined  for  surface  soiling  and  proper  seal. 
The  sample  served  in  petri-plates  should  first  be  examined  for  its  odour  in 
the  head  space  by  just  opening  the  lid  and  sniffing,  then  for  appearance 
and  finally  by  placing  a  small  amount  in  the  mouth.  Similarly  the 
reconstituted  sample  should  initially  be  tested  for  odour  and  appearance 
followed  by  flavour  examination.  The  flavour  noticed  in  the  dry  product 
should  be  related  with  that  found  in  the  reconstituted  product  before 
giving  the  final  score  for  defectives. 

6.2  Method  • —  Follow  the  composite  scoring  method  as  given  in  4.2.8  of 
IS:  6273  (  Part  II  )-1971*. 

6.3  Evaluation  Card  —  Use  the  evaluation  card  given  in  Table  I  for 
recording  observations.  Indicate  the  sample  score  in  the  column  provided 
for  it  after  deducting  the  total  defective  score  for  each  attribute. 

6.4  Grading  —  After  computation  of  data  recorded  in  Table  1  by 
panelists  the  following  grades  should  be  awarded: 

Score  Grade 

90  and  above  Excellent 

80  —  89  Good 

60—79  Fair 

59  and  below  Poor 

6.5  Statistical  Evaluation  of  Results 

6.5.1  For    the   purpose   of  statistical    evaluation   one   of  the  methods 
mentioned  under  4.2.8.4  of  IS  :  6273  (  Part  II  )-1971*  should  be  adopted. 


♦Guide  for  sensory  evaluation  of  foods:  Part  11  Methods  and  evaluation  cards. 

7 


IS  :  10030  -  1981 


TABLE  1  EVALUATION  CARD  FOR  MILK  POWDER 

(  Clauses  6.3  and  6.4  ) 


Name Date.. 

Code  No Time. 


A)   Score  the  sample  for  different  characteristics.     Indicate  the  degree  of  defects,  if 
any,  encircling  the  applicable  one  and  deduct  accordingly  from  the  attribute 


ChAKACT  ERISTIC 

Maximum 

Score 

Minimum  for  Each 
Attribute  Score 

Sample 
Score 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

i)   Package     appearance 

ii)   Appearance     of     dry 
product 

5 
15 

3 
9 

iii)  Appearance      of 
reconstituted    milk 

15 

9 

iv)   Body     and       texture 
of        reconstituted 
milk 

20 

60 

v)   Flavour    of    reconsti- 
tuted milk 

Note  —  If  the  sample 
to  be  rejected. 

B)   Degree  of  defects 
Characteristic 


(1) 

i)   Appearance  of  package 
ii)  Appearance     of      dry 

product 
iii)  Appearance       of 

reconstituted  milk 

iv)  Flavour 


45  60 

scores  less  than  the  minimum  for  any  characteristic,  it  is 


Defect 


Degree  of  Defect 


Suspi- 
cion 

Defi- 
nite 

Pronou- 
nced 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

Soiled      surface/unsealed 

1 

2 

3 

Caked/brown        particles 
extraneous  matter 

2 

5 

10 

Lumpy  brown 
Churned/brown      particles 

grainy/undispersed  lumps 
Oxidized/stale/rancid 
Ghalky/acid/   neutralizer/ 
saltv 

1 

2 
2 

2 

2 

5 

3 

5 

5 

10 
10 

10 

Metallic/cooked/scorched 

I 

2 

5 

Weedy/bitter/foreign 

5 

10 

15 

