**************** 


*  i&$z 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live" 


IS  10028-2  (1981) :  Code  of  practice  for  selection, 
installation  and  maintenance  of  transformers;  Part  2 
Installation  [ETD  16:  Transformers] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
"Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


?&&IiII}g&*±2te 


^\i»i>^/a^> 


\\\«ktc 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


?TR  V^  T^TT  <sMHI  |  3ft  ^ft  ^FT\  ^f  W  *T^?TT  )f 
Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


• 


• 


• 


BLANK  PAGE 


^  *g», 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS:  10028  (Part  II) -1981 

Indian  Standard      ( Reaffirmed  2001 } 

CODE  OF  PRACTICE  FOR 

SELECTION,  INSTALLATION  AND 

MAINTENANCE  OF  TRANSFORMERS 

PART  II  INSTALLATION 

(  Sixth  Reprint  JUNE  1998  ) 

UDC  621.314.21.005 


©  Copyright  1982 
BUREAU   OF   INDIAN    STANDARDS 

MANAK  BHAVAN,  9  BAHADUR  SHAH  ZAFAR  MARG 
NEW  DELHI   110002 

Gr9  September  1982 


IS:  10028  (Part  II) -1981 

Indian  Standard 

CODE  OF  PRACTICE  FOR 

SELECTION,  INSTALLATION  AND 

MAINTENANCE  OF  TRANSFORMERS 

PART  II     INSTALLATION 

Code  of  Practice  for  Power  Installation  and  Maintenance  Sectional 
Committee,  ETDC  20 

Chairman  Representing 

Shri  K.  K.  Bose  Calcutta  Electric  Supply  Corporation  Ltd,  Calcutta 

Members 

Shri  A.  Chatterjee  (  Alternate  to 
Shri  K.  K.  Bose  ) 

Shri  B.  C.  Alva  Karnataka  Electricity  Board,  Bangalore 

Shri  T.  N.  R.  Rao  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  M.J.  Anandamurthy  Chief  Electrical   Inspector  to   the    Government  of 

Tamil  Nadu,  Madras 
Electrical  Inspector  (  Tech- 
nical )  to  the  Government 
of  Tamil  Nadu  (  Alternate  ) 

S«ri  P.  D.  Bagade  Tata  Consulting  Engineers,  Bombay 

Shri  R.  C.  Bajpal  (  Alternate ) 

Shri  V.  S.  Bhatia  Siemens  India  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  K.  K.  Pant  {  Alternate  ) 

Shri  K.  V.  Chaubal  The  Federation  of  Electricity  Undertakings  of  India, 

Bombay 
Shri  K.  S.  Joshi  ( Alternate ) 

Chief  Electrical  Engineer  Railway  Board,  Ministry  of  Railways 

Deputy  Director  Stand- 
ards (Elec)— IV,  RDSO 
(Alternate) 

Chief  Engineer  {  Elec)-I  Central  Public  Works  Department,  New  Delhi 

Surveyor  of  Works  (  Elec  )-I 
(  Alternate ) 

Shri  B.  L.  Deshpande  Electrical  Engineer  to  Government  of  Maharashtra, 

Bombay 

(  Continued  on  page  2  ) 


0  Copyright  1982 

BUREAU    OF    INDIAN     STANDARDS 

This  publication  is  protected  under  the  Indian  Copyright  Act  (  XIV  of  1957  )  and 
reproduction  in  whole  or  in  part  by  any  means  except  with  written  permission  of  the 
publisher  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an  infringement  of  copyright  under  the  said  Act. 


IS  :  10028  ( Part  II )  - 1981 

(Continued  from  page  I  ) 

Members  Representing 

Shri  Devender  Nath  Larsen  &  Toubro  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  T.  P.  R.  Sarma  ( Alternate ) 
Shri  K.  V.  Dharmadhikari  Jyoti  Ltd,  Vadodara 

Shri  D.  J.  Hastak  Maharashtra  State  Electricity  Board,  Bombay 

Member  (  Hydro-Electric  )  Central  Electricity  Authority.  New  Delhi 

Director  (  Hed  )-l  (  Alternate ) 

Shri  D.  R.  Neelappa  Reddy  NGEF  Ltd,  Bangalore 

Shri  G.  S.  N.  Murthv  (  Alternate) 
Shri  K.  P.  R.  Pillai  Fact      Engineering      and      Design      Organization, 

Udyogamandal 
Shri  G.  R.  R.  Menon  (  Alternate  ) 
Lt-Col  3.  B.  Rajpal  Engineer-in-Chief's     Branch,     Army     Headquarters 

(  Ministry  of  Defence  ) 
Shri  S.  K.  Shangari  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  Ranes  Ray  Choudhuri  Engineering    Construction      Corporation     Limited, 

Bombay 
Shri  L.  E.  D.  Cruz  (  Alternate ) 
Shri  B.  M.  Sam  ant  The  Bombay  Electric  Supply  and  Transport  Under- 

taking, Bombay 
Shri  S.  R.  Ugrankar  (  Alternate } 
Shri  I.  C.  Sanger  Delhi  Electric  Supply  Undertaking,  New  Delhi 

Shri  P.  S.  Sawhney  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  Sardui.  Singh  Chief  Electrical  Inspector  to    the    Government    of 

Punjab,  Chandigarh 
Sardar  D.  S.  Uppal  {Alternate) 
Shri  V.  Sathyanathan  Tamil  Nadu  Electricity  Board,  Madras 

Shri  B.  Krishnarat  ( Alternate  ) 
Shri  R.  Satyabal  Tariff    Advisory     Committee,     General    Insurance 

Association  of  India,  Bombay 
Shri  K.  K.  Mamdal  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  P.  K.  Saxena  Rural  Electrification  Corporation  Ltd,  New  Delhi 

Shri  G.  L.  Dua  (  Alternate ) 
Dr  T.  C.  Sidhan  Chief   Electrical  Inspector  to    the    Government  of 

Kerala,  Trivandrum 
Shri  K.  S.  Subrahmaniyam  Bharat  Heavy  Electricals  Ltd,  Secunderabad 

Shri  G.  P.  Pahwa  (  Alternate ) 
Shri  G.  N.  Thadani  Engineers  India  Ltd,  New  Delhi 

Shri  S.  G.  Goehale  (  Alternate } 
Shri  S.  Vaidyanathan  Kerala  State  Electricity  Board,  Trivandrum 

Shri  R.  Varadarajan  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  S.  P.  Sachdev,  Director  General,  BIS  (  Ex-officio  Member ) 

Director  (  Elec  tech  ) 

Secretary 

Shri  K.  Ganesh 

Assistant  Director  ( Elec  tech  ),  BIS 

(  Continued  on  page  46 } 


IS  :  10028  ( Part  II )  -  1981 

Indian  Standard 

CODE  OF  PRACTICE  FOR 

SELECTION,  INSTALLATION  AND 

MAINTENANCE  OF  TRANSFORMERS 

PART  II      INSTALLATION 

0.     FOREWORD 

0.1  This  Indian  Standard  was  adopted  by  the  Indian  Standards  Institution 
on  25  November  1981,  after  the  draft  finalized  by  the  Code  of  Practice 
for  Power  Installation  and  Maintenance  Sectional  Committee  had  been 
approved  by  the  Electrotechnical  Division  Council. 

0.2  The  code  of  practice  on  installation  and  maintenance  of  transformers 
was  originally  published  in  1961  as  IS  :  1886,  intended  as  a  guide  to  installa- 
tion engineers,  contractors  and  others  engaged  in  the  installation  and  main- 
tenance of  power  and  distribution  transformers.  It  was  made  up-to-date 
subsequently  in  1967,  with  additional  details  regarding  internal  inspection 
of  transformers.  Apart  from  the  information  concerning  transformers 
themselves,  the  code  covered  ancillary  work  such  as  ventilation,  cabling  and 
isolation  of  transformers. 

0.3  The  present  version  of  the  code  is  being  brought  out  to  include  additio- 
nal details  on  criteria  for  selection  of  transformers,  transportation  to  the 
point  of  installation,  taking  also  into  view  the  latest  thinking  on  the 
methods  of  supervision  and  maintenance  of  insulating  oil  in  service. 

The  present  code  does  not  cover  special  purpose  transformers  and 
instrument  transformers.  It  is  however,  intended  to  supplement  the  details 
for  the  same  at  a  future  date. 

0.4  This  standard  closely  follows  the  earlier  version,  though  currently  being 
presented  in  three  parts  mainly  in  order  to  identify  information  and  to 
consolidate  them  in  functionally  coherent  sections.  This  standard  is  hence 
brought  out  in  three  parts,  viz: 

Part  I  Selection  (  under  preparation  ) 

Part  II  Installation 

Part  III  Maintenance 

AH  parts  shall  hence  be  read  in  conjunction.  This  standard  (  Part  II ) 
partly  supersedes  the  provisions  of  IS  :  1886-1967*,  which  will  be  with- 
drawn when  all  the  parts  are  made  available. 

•Code  of  practice  for  installation  and  maintenance  of  transformers  {first  revision) . 


IS  :  10028  (  Part  H )  - 1981 

0.5  In  view  of  the  fact  that  this  code  is  required  to  be  in  conformity  with 
the  prevailing  statutory  regulations  in  the  country,  reference  to  the  relevant 
provisions  of  the  Indian  Electricity  Rules,  1956,  has  been  made  at 
appropriate  places. 

0.6  In  the  preparation  of  this  code,  considerable  assistance  has  been  derived 

from  the  following: 

IS  :  6600-1972  Guide  for  loading  of  oil-immersed  transformers 

IS  :  8478-1977  Application  guide  for  on-load  tap-changers 

IS  :  4146-1967  Application  guide  for  voltage  transformers 

IS  :  4201-1967  Application  guide  for  current  transformers 

'Specification  for  power  and  distribution  transformers.  Section  K 
Erection,  maintenance  and  commissioning  manual*  issued  by  the 
Central  Board  of  Irrigation  and  Power. 

0.7  For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of  tfiis 
standard  is  complied  with,  the  final  value,  observed  or  calculated,  expressing 
the  result  of  a  test,  shall  be  rounded  off  in  accordance  with  IS  :  2-1960*. 
The  number  of  significant  places  retained  in  the  rounded  off  value  should 
be  same  as  that  of  the  specified  value  in  this  standard. 


1.  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  (  Part  II )  covers  guidance  on  installation  of  distribution 
and  power  transformers  covered  by  IS  :  1180-19641  and  IS  :  2026 J  ( issued 
in  various  parts  )-1977f  respectively. 

1.2  Special  purpose  transformers  such  as  gas  cooled,  synthetic  liquid 
insulated,  dry  type  and  mining  transformers,  and  instrument  transformers 
are  excluded  from  the  scope  of  this  code.  In  such  cases,  manufacturers* 
instructions  shall  be  strictly  followed. 

2.  TERMINOLOGY 

2.1  For  the  purpose  of  this  code,  the  definitions  given  in  IS  :  1 1 80- 1 964f 
and  IS  :  2026  (  Part  I  >1977J  shall  apply. 

♦Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  (  revised  ). 

tSpecification  for  outdoor  type  three-phase  distribution  transformers  up  to  and  inclu- 
ding 100  kVA  11  kV  (  revised  ) . 

tSpecification  for  power  transformers: 
Part  I  General  {first  revision ) . 
Part  II  Temperature-rise  (first  revision  ). 
Part  III  Insulation  level  and  dielectric  tests  (first  rtvision). 
Part  IV  Terminal  markings,  tappings  and  connections  (first revision). 


IS  :  10028  (Part  II) -1981 
3.  GENERAL  GUIDELINES 

3.1  Exchange  of  Information 

3.1.1  Before  ordering  the  equipment,  information  pertaining  to  installa- 
tion operation  and  maintenance  should  be  collected  and  examined  by  the 
purchaser  so  that  the  equipment  is  procured  to  suit  the  duties,  location 
and  installation  conditions  under  which  it  is  to  operate.  This  information 
should  include  any  special  building  features,  such  as  access  doors,  lifting 
beams,  oil  sumps,  cable  trenches,  foundation  details  and  ventilating 
arrangement,  which  may  be  desirable. 

3.1.2  Details  of  the  electricity  supply  available  and  of  any  special 
requirements  limiting  the  ratings  of  equipment  which  may  be  connected  to 
the  supply  should  be  ascertained  from  the  supply  authority.  These  may 
include  abnormal  overvoltages  and  their  duration,  variations  in  frequency, 
etc. 

3.2  Interchangeability  —  Where  a  number  of  similarly  rated  units  are  to  be 
used,  arrangements  should  preferably  be  made  for  such  units  to  be 
interchangeable  as  regards  electrical  characteristics,  if  required  for  parallel 
operation  and  essential  dimensions,  such  as  those  affecting  the  fixed 
arrangements,  space  occupied,  position  of  cable  boxes  or  terminals,  direc- 
tion and  gauge  of  rollers,  etc.  Where  cable-end  boxes  form  part  of  the 
transformer,  these  may  be  of  the  detachable  type.  Wherever  required, 
care  shall  be  taken  to  adequately  support  the  cable  boxes  while  interchan- 
ging the  transformers. 

3.3  Compliance  with  Indian  Electricity  Rules  and  Other  Regulations 

3.3.1  All  electrical  installations  shall  comply  with  the  requirements  of 
the  Indian  Electricity  Act  and  Rules  made  thereunder  and  with  any  other 
regulations  that  may  be  applicable,  such  as  those  made  under  Factories 
Act,  1948  and  Fire  Insurance  Act.  The  following  rules  of  Indian  Electricity 
Rules,  1956,  are  particularly  applicable: 

35,   45,   50,   51,   59,  61,  62,  63,   64,  65,   67,    68,    69    and    114. 

3.3.2  It  is  recommended  that  the  local  authorities  concerned  in  the 
administration  of  the  rules  and  regulations  in  the  matter  of  the  layout  and 
of  the  installation  of  the  transformer  should  be  consulted  in  regard  to  the 
rules  and  regulations  that  may  be  applicable. 

3.3.3  The  electrical  installation  shall  be  carried  out  only  by  authorized 
persons  competent  to  undertake  such  work  under  the  rules  and  regulations 
that  may  be  in  force  in  different  states. 

3.4  Connection  with  Earth  —  All  connections  to  earth  shall  be  made  in 
accordance  with  IS  :  3043-1966*. 

•Code  of  practice  for  earthing. 


IS:  10028  (Part  II) -1981 

3.5  Isolation — A  circuit-breaker  or  a  linked  switch  of  requisite  breaking 
capacity  shall  be  installed  on  both  sides  of  the  transformer,  unless  specifi- 
cally exempted  by  the  authorities,  so  as  to  carry  and  break  the  current  on 
all  phases  and  to  isolate  the  transformer  from  both  sides.  The  linked 
switch  on  the  primary  side  of  the  transformer  may  be  of  such  capacity  as 
to  carry  the  full  load  primary  current  and  to  break  only  the  magnetising 
current  of  the  transformer,  provided  the  linked  switch  or  circuit  breaker 
on  the  secondary  side  is  of  such  a  capacity  as  to  carry  the  full  load 
secondary  current  and  interrupt  the  system  short-circuit  currents.  All  the 
isolating  devices  shall  be  placed  in  an  accessible  position  for  operation  by 
authorized  persons  only  ( see  also  4.5). 

Note  —  The  cases  of  exemption  by  authorities  referred  above  relate  to  cases  such  as 
rectifier  built-in  transformers,  furnace  transformers,  etc. 

3.6  Provisions  for  Draining  of  Oil  —  Transformers  installed  inside  buildings, 
where  the  oil  capacity  exceeds  2  000  litres  of  oil,  shall  be  provided  with 
oil  soak  pits.  Typical  designs  of  oil  soak  pits  are  shown  in  Fig.  1.  Oil 
soak  pits  may  also  be  made  of  RCC  tanks. 

3.6.1  For  indoor  transformers,  oil  soak  pits  shall  be  provided  either  under 
the  transformer  or  outside  the  transformer  room. 

3.6.2  If  two  or  more  transformers  are  installed  side  by  side,  they  shall  be 
separated  by  fire-separation  walls.  Fire  separation  walls  are  deemed  to 
be  adequate  from  fire-safety  point  of  view,  even  if  oil  capacity  of  individual 
transformers  do  not  exceed  2  000  litres,  and  total  capacity  of  all  transfor- 
mers installed  side  by  side  exceeds  2  000  litres. 

Note  —  Reference    shall    also    be    made    to   4    of   SP :  7   (Part  IV  )-1970*    and 
IS:  I641-1960t. 

3.6.3  The  capacity  of  the  oil  soak  pit  shall  be  such  that  to  soak  the  entire 
oil  content  of  the  transformer,  it  is  intended  for  individual  soak  pits  for 
each  transformer  (  wherever  necessary )  with  capacity  as  above  or  a 
common  soak  pit  to  contain  the  entire  oil  content  of  the  biggest  of  the 
transformers  shall  be  adequate. 

3.6.4  Soak  pits  shall  be  designed  in  such  a  way  to  provide  for  safe 
draining  of  liquids  to  soak  pits. 

4.  DESIGN 

4.0  The  following  clauses  cover  installation  design  features  of  transformers. 
Special  requirements  may  have  'to  be  complied  with  and  special  features 
might  have  to  be  built  into  the  design  of  transformer  by  the  manufacturer 

•National  building  code  of  India. 

tCode  of  practice  for  fire-safety  of  buildings  ( general )  :  General  principles  and  fire 
grading. 


FILLING  OF  RIVER  GRAVEL 
OR  SHINGLES  COARSE  SIZES 

EXCEPT  TOP  10  TO  15cm 


-FIREPROOF 

WALL 


TRANSFORMER 

SOAK    PIT 


111 


-FILLING    OF   RIVER   GRAVEL 
OR    SHINGLES   COARSE 
SIZES    EXCEPT    TOP 
10  TO  I5cnr> 
LEVEL 

TRANSFORMER    50AK    PIT 
VOLUME  SUFFICIENT    TO 
CONTAIN   ALL  TRANS- 
FORMER  OIL 


FLOOR    STEEPLY 
SLOPED    TO    DRAIN 


-SOAK    PIT 


^-FIREPROOF 
WALL 


1A 


IB 


7~ 

0-3x0-3  OIL  DRAIN-/    XL 


SECTION   BB 


X 

T 


FIREPROOF  DOOR  WITH 
EXPANDED  METAL  FRAME 

ATTACHED  AT  THE  BOTTOM 
FOR    VENTILATION— - 


WATER    TIGHT 
MANHOLE  COVER 


VENT  PIPE 


OS 
}" 
T  " 

1-0 


0-75 
I i 


w 


DAMP-PROOF 
COURSE-^ 


GL      B 


.;:  "*&%'/■■/ 


SECTION    XX 


SECTION    VY 


1C 

Note  1  — Sketch  shows  typical  arrangement  for  a  transformer  installed  in  a  locality  nut  subject  to  seepage  ofsubsod 
water  in  this  case.     The  soak  pit  should  not  be  p  1  as tr rod    inside  or  outside  and  the  bottom    should  be  left  open  to  earth. 

Note  2  — In  locations  prone  to  seepage  of  subsoil  water  reinforced  concrete  construction  of  soak  pit  should  be 
adopted,  the  bottom  of  the  soak  pit  being  also  sealed  to  prevent  ingress  of  water. 

Note  3  — The  size  of  the  soak  pit  will  depend  on  the  quantity  of  oil  in  the  transformer,  and  type  of  construction  of 
soak  pit,  the  main  consideration  being  that  the  entire  quantity  of  oil  should  be  quickly  drained  away  from  the  transfor- 
mer room  into  and/or  away  from  the  soak  pit.  Recommended  minimum  cross-section  for  the  type  of  construction 
shown  is  E2  X  1'2 

Note  4  — Exhaust  fan  may  have  to  be  provided  in  the  transformer  room,  if  site  conditions  do  not.  permit  adequate 
natural  ventilation. 

All  dimensions   in  metres. 

Fig.  1     Typical  Designs  of  Soak  Pits  tor  Transformers 


i/i 


Is* 

00 


As  in  the  Original  Standard,  this  Page  is  Intentionally  Left  Blank 


IS -.10028  (Part II) -1981 

for  equipment  to  be  installed  in  siesmic  zones.    Even  though,  at  this  stage, 
standardization  of  such  practices  had  not  been  achieved,  users  may  refer  to    ■ 
IS  :  1893-1 975 ;:  for  general  guidance. 

4.1  General  —  The  construction  of  all  apparatus  and  conductors  shall  be 
such  that  operating  temperatures  of  components  do  not  exceed  the  safe 
figures  laid  down  in  the  relevant  Indian  Standard  specifications  having 
regard  to  the  conditions  in  which  the  equipment  is  used.  The  equipment 
shall  be  so  installed,  operated  and  maintained  as  to  ensure  that  such  safe 
temperatures  are  not  exceeded. 

4.2  Electrical  Protection  of  Circuits  and  Apparatus  —  All  apparatus  and 
associated  cable-work  should  be  protected  at  the  origin  of  the  circuit 
against  the  eifects  of  electrical  faults  in  the  circuit  by  a  suitable  device. 

4.3  Neutral  Connection  —  The  manner  of  connection  between  the  neutral 
of  the  transformer  and  the  earth  should  be  decided  taking  into  account 
any  effect  on  transformer's  cost,  method  of  protection  of  transformer  and 
electrical  system,  requirements  concerning  interference  with  telephone  lines, 
requirements  of  system  operation,  etc. 

4.3.1  Earthing  of  neutral  shall  be  carried  out  in  accordance  with 
IS:  3043-19661- 

4.4  Terminations  —  When  the  incoming  or  outgoing  cables  are  terminated 
adjacent  to  the  transformer  and  a  bare  connection  made  from  the  cable 
terminals  to  the  transformer  bushings  ;  the  cable  terminals,  in  such  a  case 
should  be  at  a  sufficiently  high  elevation  so  as  to  be  inaccessible  or 
suitably  protected  by  an  enclosure.  All  bare  connections  shall  be  suitably 
protected  against  birdage,  vermin  effects,  etc,  so  as  to  avoid  unnecessary 
interruption  of  supply. 

4.5  Isolation  of  Equipment 

4.5.1  Means  should  be  provided  for  the  complete  isolation  of  every 
transformer  from  the  supply  and  these  should  be  so  placed  as  to  be  readily 
accessible  from  the  position  in  which  danger  may  arise  to  enable  the  supply 
to  such  transformers  to  be  cut  off  immediately  ( see  also  3.5  ).  In  making 
provision  for  isolation,  due  regard  should  be  paid  to  the  necessity  for 
isolating  all  control,  pilot  and  interlocking  circuits,  whether  these  are 
derived  from  the  main  source  of  supply  or  independently.  If  it  is  not  practi- 
cable to  carry  out  complete  isolation  with  a  single  device,  clear  and 
concise  instructions  should  be  affixed  to  the  apparatus  in  a  permanent 
manner  setting  out  the  procedure  to  be  adopted  to  secure  complete  isolation. 

4.5.2  Where  the  control  apparatus  for  transformer  is  liable  to  be  exposed 
to  an  inflammable  atmosphere  the  means  of  isolation  should  be  placed  in 

•Criteria  for  earthquake  resistant  design  of  structures  ( third  revision  }, 
fCode  of  practice  for  earthing. 


IS  :  10028  ( Part  II )  -  1981 

an  enclosure  independent  of  the  apparatus  which  it  is  designed  to  isolate. 
Alternatively  they  shall  be  mounted  in  a  flameproof  enclosure  forming  a 
part  of,  but  segregated  in  a  manner  to  render  it  flameproof  from  the 
compartment  enclosing  the  apparatus  which  it  is  designed  to  isolate.  The 
isolating  means  being  provided  shall  have  an  independent  access  cover. 

4.6  Surge  Protection 

4.6.1  The  desirability  of  providing  protection  to  the  transformer  from 
surges  of  atmospheric  or  other  origins  shall  be  examined  carefully  in  every 
case.  Installations  including  terminations  of  overhead  lines  as  well  as 
cables,  require  careful  study. 

4.6.2  If  lightning  arresters  are  to  be  installed  they  shall  be  used  in 
accordance  with  IS  :  4004-1967*. 

4.6.3  Earthing  of  lightning  arresters  shall  be  carried  out  in  accordance 
with  IS  :3043-1966|. 

5.  TRANSPORTATION 

5.0  The  engineer  should  obtain,  well  in  advance,  all  relevant  information 
about  the  overall  dimensions,  weight  for  transport,  dimensions  of  the 
transport,  installation,  etc,  of  the  transformer  in  question.  Often,  it  is 
necessary  to  check  up  with  rail  or  road  authorities  and  enlist  their  coopera- 
tion for  the  purpose  of  transporting  transformers  to  the  site.  This  may 
involve  procurement  of  trans-shipment  facilities,  special  wagons  or  trailers, 
checking  up  of  capacity  of  bridges,  railway  loading  gauge,  and  similar 
matters.  It  is  also  desirable  to  check  with  the  insurers  regarding  conditions 
there  may  be;  to  be  complied  with,  during  transportation. 

5.0.1  It  is  recognized  that  specific  guidelines  and  strict  rules  cannot  be 
specified  in  this  standard  regarding  the  method  to  be  adopted  for  trans- 
portation. Keeping  this  in  view,  it  is  suggested  that  while  assistance  can 
be  taken  from  the  following,  it  shall  also  be  borne  that  each  individual 
consignment  has  to  be  worked  out  as  a  special  case  and  details  decided 
between  the  buyer  and  the  seller. 

5.1  Packing  and  Despatch 

5.1.0  After  testing  each  transformer,  it  shall  be  despatched  from  the 
works  ready  for  taking  into  service.  According  to  the  transport  facilities 
available  for  the  route,  transformers  are  transported  either  by  rail,  road  or 
sea. 


•Application    guide   for    non-linear   resistor-type   lightning  arresters   for  alternating 
current  systems. 

fCode  of  practice  for  earthing. 

10 


IS  :  10028  ( Part  n)- 1981 

5.1.1  Transformers  after  processing  and  testing  are  despatched  from  the 
factory  either: 

a)  dried  and  completely  filled  with  oii,  ready  for  service; 

b)  with  oil  covering  core  and  coil,  balance  space  filled  with  dry  air 
or  inert  gas;  or 

c)  completely  filled   with  dry  air  or  inert  gas  at  a  small  positive 
pressure. 

Note  —  The  pressure  of  filling  of  dry  air  or  inert  gas  shall  be  such  that,  after 
transportation  inspite  of  leakage  and  variation  of  ambient  temperature,  a  positive 
pressure  still  exists  ( set  5.1.2 ). 

In  case  of  large  transformers  some  of  the  accessories  are  despatched 
separately. 

5.1.2  Transformer  tank  is  filled  with  oil  or  pure  dry  inert  gas  depending 
upon  the  transport  weight  limitations.  In  case  the  tank  is  filled  with  oil, 
sufficient  space  is  left  above  the  oil  to  take  care  of  the  expansion  of  the 
oil.  This  space  is  filled  with  inert  gas  under  positive  pressure  or  pure  dry 
air  under  atmospheric  pressure.  In  case  the  tank  is  filled  with  inert  gas, 
a  positive  pressure  according  to  the  manufacturer's  standard  practice  shall 
be  maintained.  The  temperature  and  pressure  at  the  time  of  gas  filling  shall 
be  marked  on  a  tag.  External  gas  cylinders  may  also  be  provided  to  make 
up  any  gas  leakage  during  transit  for  transformers  having  ratings  50  MVA 
and  above.  In  such  cases  the  transformer  shall  be  accompanied  by  escort 
decided  by  the  manufacturers  or  the  customers  as  per  the  agreement. 

5.1.3  All  external  fittings  such  as  bushings,  conservator,  Buchholtz  relay, 
de-hydrating  breather,  explosion  vent,  radiators,  rollers,  etc,  which  are 
liable  to  damage  in  transit  shall  be  removed  and  packed  separately.  All 
openings  created  on  the  tank  by  the  removal  of  components  are  blanked 
with  identifiable  blanking  plates.  All  openings  on  the  fittings  removed 
are  also  closed  with  blanking  plates. 

5.1.4  When  any  internal  parts  like  tap  changers  or  insulating  items  are 
removed  for  transportation,  they  are  despatched  in  tanks  filled  with  oil/ 
inert  gas  or  suitable  measures  taken  so  that  they  do  not  absorb  moisture. 

5.1.5  All  fragile  parts  such  as  temperature  indicators,  oil  level  gauges, 
bushings,  etc,  shall  be  carefully  packed  to  avoid  breakage  in  transit., 

5.1.6  All  blanking  plates,  tank  valve  guards,  etc,  used  exclusively  for 
transport  may  be  preserved  for  future  use. 

5.2  Rail  Transport 
5.2.1  General 

5.2.1.1  A  majority  of  transformers  are  transported  by  rail  due  to 
considerations  in  weight,  dimensions  and  economy.   In  cases  of  transformers 

11 


IS:  10028  ( Part  II  )-198j 

where  the  weight  and  dimensions  of  the  main  body  exceed  limits,  special 
well  wagons  are  employed.  Detached  parts  are  packed/crated  and  normally 
despatched  along  with  the  main  body  of  the  unit,  so  that  all  the  parts  are 
received  at  the  destination  station  with  the  unit, 

5.2.2  Loading 

5.2.2.1  Most  of  the  transformer  manufacturers  have  their  own  railway 
siding  and  transformers  are  loaded  at  their  works  using  their  cranes.  In 
cases  where  separate  siding  facilities  are  not  available,  road  tractor  trailers 
are  used  for  the  transport  from  works  to  loading  railway  stations.  Mobile 
cranes  and  railway  cranes  are  also  used  for  loading  the  units  onto  the 
wagons.  In  the  absence  of  any  crane  facility,  the  transformers  are  unloaded 
from  the  trailers  near  the  railway  track  onto  a  platform  of  adequate  height, 
built  up  of  wooden  sleepers.  Jacks  and  pull  lifts  chain  pulley  block  of 
adequate  capacity  are  used  to  slide  the  transformer  over  a  pair  of  rails 
placed  on  the  sleeper  platform  bridging  the  trailer  width  in  full.  To  prevent 
the  trailer  from  toppling  when  the  transformer  is  moved  to  the  platform, 
the  stage  end  of  the  trailer  is  supported  by  a  sleeper  pack.  From  the 
platform  the  transformer  is  slid  onto  the  wagon  taking  care  to  have  the 
rails  for  the  full  width  of  wagon.  The  rails  are  greased  for  easy  movement. 
The  rollers  of  the  transformer  are  removed  before  leaving  the  works.  While 
providing  a  sleeper  stage  it  should  slightly  be  at  a  higher  level  to  allow  for 
the  increase  in  height  of  the  trailer  while  the  load  is  released  due  to  the 
springs  getting  relaxed. 

5.2.3  Lifting  and  Jacking 

5.2.3.1  Transformers  should  be  lifted  by  the  lugs  or  shackles  provided 
for  the  purpose  and  simultaneous  use  should  be  made  of  all  such  lugs 
or  shackles  in  order  to  avoid  any  unbalance  in  lifting.  Before  lifting  the 
complete  transformer  it  should  be  ensured  that  ail  cover  bolts  are  tightened. 
Apart  from  the  main  lifting  points  designed  to  take  the  total  weight  of 
the  unit,  the  transformer  has  subsidiary  lifting  points  suitable  for  particular 
components  only.  Care  shall  be  taken  to  distinguish  between  them.  It 
is  advisable  to  use  a  spreader  between  slings  so  that  the  lift  on  the  hooks  is 
in  the  vertical  direction.  The  slinging  angle  is  not  to  exceed  60°.  Safe 
loads  of  wire  ropes  and  the  multiplying  factor  to  be  used  corresponding 
to  the  lifting  angles  shall  be  kept  in  view.  Gunnies  are  used  on  the  slings  to 
avoid  metal  contact  and  consequent  damage  to  the  slings. 

5.2.3.2  Where  it  is  necessary  to  use  jacks  for  lifting,  only  the  projections 
provided  for  the  purpose  of  jacking  should  be  used.  Jacks  should  never  be 
placed  under  valves  or  cooling  tubes.  Not  more  than  two  jacks  should 
be  operated  at  the  same  time.  When  two  jacks  are  being  operated  the 
opposite  side  of  the  transformer  should  be  firmly  supported  by  sleepers. 
Jacks  are  also  not  to  be  left  in  position  with  load  for  a  long  time.  The 
transformer  should  always  be  handled  in  the  normal  upright  position. 
During  the  handling  operation  care  shall  be  taken  to  prevent  overturning. 

12 


IS  :  10028  ( Part  H)- 1981 


5.2.3.3  Loading  on  the  railway  wagons  is  done  as  centrally  as  possible 
to  distribute  the  weight  equally  on  all  axles  and  wheels.  Manufacturer's 
drawing  in  this  regard  is  to  be  referred  to.  It  is  desired  that  the 
transformer  is  loaded  longitudinally  on  the  wagon.  To  prevent  damage  to 
the  transformer  base,  the  unit  is  loaded  on  a  row  of  sleepers  or  wooden 
planks  placed  on  the  wagon  floor. 

5.2.4  Lashing 

5.2.4.1  The  transformer  is  lashed  on  all  four  sides  by  wire  ropes  or 
chain  of  adequate  size  and  are  tightened  using  turn  buckles  with 
locking  facility.  Wooden  props  are  also  used.  After  the  movement  of  the 
wagon  for  a  short  distance  the  tightness  of  the  lashing  is  to  be  checked. 
When  enroute  transhipment  is  involved,  lashing  is  to  be  checked  again. 

5.3  Road  Transport 

5.3.1  General 

5.3.1.1  Generally  road  transport  is  resorted  to  in  the  case  of  smaller 
units  or  where  rail  links  are  not  available  or  where  well  developed  road 
systems  exist.  Multi-axle  tractor  driven  low-platform  trailers  are  used  for 
road  transport.  The  tractors  are  to  have  adequate  hauling  capacity  and 
the  trailers  loading  capacity. 

5.3.2  Route  Survey 

5.3.2.1  The    road  system    is 
points : 

i)  Width  of  the  road 
ii)  Bridges  and  culverts 


iii)  Encumbrances         en 
route 


iv)  Sharp  bends  and  gra- 
dients 

v)  Road  worthiness  and 
load  bearing  capacity 
of  the  road 

vi)  Operational 


examined  in    detail    on  the  following 

normally  not  less  than  5  m. 
to  have  sufficient  strength  to  take  the 
moving    load;    consultation    with    the 
Highways  Department  is  necessary, 
like  telephone,  telegraph  traction  and 
electric  utility  wires,   avenue  trees,  cross 
beams  of  bridges,  sub-ways,  aqueducts, 
etc,  across  the  roadway, 
steep  gradients  up  or  down  and  sharp 
bends  with  respect  to  the  manoeuvrabi- 
lity of  the  tractor  trailer. 
of  the  route  like  sandy  stretches,  water- 
logged   areas,   crowded    localities    like 
market  places,  schools  and  other  public 
places. 

constraints  of  the  tractor  trailer  to  be 
used.  To  clear  up  any  doubts  as  to  the 
feasibility  of  the  route,  a  rehearsal  drive 
of  the  tractor  trailer  unit  is  performed. 


13 


IS:  10028  (Part  II)-  1981 

5.3.3  Strengthening  the  Route 

5.3.3.1  Such  of  those  bridges  and  culverts  which  require  strengthening 
are  strengthened  by  adopting  suitable  measures  like  proping  up  using 
timber  and  steel  in  consultation  with  the  Highways  Department.  In 
some  cases  an  alternative  route  by-passing  such  bridges  and  culverts  may  be 
cheaper  than  proping  up. 

5.3.4  Loadings  Lifting,  Jacking  and  Lashing  (  see  5.2.2  to  5.2.4 ) 

5.3.5  Movement 

5.3.5.1  A  pilot  vehicle  with  all  tools  and  tackles  like  jacks,  sleepers, 
chequer  plates,  crowbars,  etc,  and  sufficient  trained  staff  should  be  run 
in  front  of  the  vehicle.  Red  flags  and  danger  lamps  should  be  exhibited  at 
prominent  places  to  warn  traffic  on  the  route. 

5.3.5.2  The  branches  of  avenue  trees  that  are  likely  to  foul  the 
equipment  should  be  cleared  while  the  load  is  moved.  Electric  utility 
power  lines  likely  to  foul  should  be  switched  off  and  lifted  temporarily/  dis- 
mantled while  the  load  is  moved. 

5.3.5.3  After  moving  the  load  for  a  short  distance  tightness  of  the 
lashings  should  be  checked. 

5.3.5.4  In  the  case  of  night  halt  or  stoppage  of  the  loaded  trailer  for 
a  fairly  long  duration  the  trailer  should  be  supported  either  by  sleepers 
or  providing  supporting  jacks  on  all  sides  thus  releasing  the  load  from  the 
tyres.  Danger  lights  should  be  displayed  in  the  front  and  rear  of  the 
vehicle. 

53.5.5  For  the  normal  running,  it  is  desirable  not  to  run  the  vehicle 
over  15/20  km  per  hour  with  no  load  and  10/15  km  with  loads  on  good 
surfaced  roads.  For  bad  roads  it  is  desirable  to  run  the  vehicle  at  much 
lower  speeds. 

5.3.5.6  The  brake  system  on  the  tractor  trailer  has  to  be  carefully 
operated  whenever  the  vehicle  is  running  with  load.  While  running 
over  any  bridge  or  culvert  the  vehicle  should  be  run  only  at  a  very 
slow  speed.  Long  before  the  approach  to  the  bridge  the  speed  should 
be  brought  down  and  the  vehicle  allowed  to  proceed  over  the  bridge 
without  creating  any  impact  which  is  sometimes  caused  by  applying  brakes 
when  running  at  high  speeds.  Till  all  the  wheels  of  the  tractor  trailer 
are  clear  of  the  bridge,  the  speed  should  not  be  increased.  Transportation 
should  be  avoided  during  heavy  rains  and  foggy  weather. 

5.3.5.7  In  cases  of  the  vehicle  getting  locked  up  in  a  slipping  soil, 
the  safest  procedure  would  be  to  detach  the  tractor  after  the  trailer  had 
been  anchored  suitably  by  sleepers.  The  tractor  may  be  moved  forward 
and  anchored  suitably  with  sufficient  sleepers.  The  traiter  can  be  pulled  up 
by  winches  in  the  rear  of  the  tractor. 

14 


IS  :  10028  ( Part  H)- 1981 

5.4  Water  Transport 

5.4.1  General 

5.4.1.1  While  ocean  going  ships  are  used  for  the  high  seas,  barges 
are  used  for  inland  navigation  routes.  Special  care  is  to  be  taken  for 
prevention  of  rusting  of  parts  and  ingress  of  moisture  like  use  of  anti- 
corrosive  paints,  silicagel  packings,  sealing  using  polythene  covers,  etc. 
Packages  should  not  be  left  on  wharves  for  more  than  2  weeks.  Storing  of 
heavy  packings  is  to  be  done  only  in  consultation  with  port  authorities 
so  that  the  safety  of  the  wharf  is  not  endangered. 

5.4.2  Loading 

5.4.2.1  Usually  the  wharf  cranes  may  not  have  sufficient  capacity 
for  handling  very  heavy  packages.  Special  floating  cranes  or  cranes  of 
ships  are  used  for  loading  the  packages  from  the  wharf  to  ships  or  barges. 
In  the  case  of  barges  special  care  is  required  to  prevent  over-turning  of  the 
barge  at  the  time  of  loading.  Packages  are  to  be  placed  inside  the  hold. 
Decks  of  ships  are  not  to  be  used  for  keeping  the  packings  during 
transport. 

5.5  Unloading  at  Site 

5.5.1  In  cases  where  the  substations  are  having  adequate  crane  facility, 
the  transformer  is  unloaded  by  crane.  Alternatively,  mobile  cranes  are 
used.  Where  no  crane  facility  is  available  a  trench  is  dug  to  a  depth  equal 
to  the  height  of  the  trailer  platform  and  the  transformer  is  slid  to  position. 
If  this  also  is  not  possible  the  transformer  is  unloaded  onto  a  sleeper 
platform  and  gradually  lowered  to  plinth  level.  The  sleeper  platform 
level  is  to  be  at  a  slightly  higher  level  to  allow  for  the  increase  in  height  of 
the  trailer  while  the  load  is  released  due  to  the  springs  getting  relaxed. 
Winches  are  to  be  used  for  putting  the  transformer  into  position. 

6.  INSPECTION  AND  STORAGE 

6.1  Inspection 

6.1.1  Transformers  are  liable  to  get  damaged  during  transit  and  therefore 
it  is  recommended  that  immediately  on  arrival,  the  transformer  should  be 
unpacked  and  examined  for  any  sign  of  damage  in  transit,  particular 
attention  being  paid  to  the  following: 

a)  Tank  sides  or  cooling  tubes  dented, 

b)  Protruding  fittings  damaged, 

c)  Oil  sight-glass  broken, 

d)  Bushings  cracked  or  broken, 

e)  Bolts  lose  due  to  vibration  in  transit, 

15 


IS  :  10028  ( Part  It )  - 1981 

f)  Oil  leakage  ( if  filled  with  oil )  particularly  along  the  welds  or 
reduction  in  the  pressure  of  the  gas  ( if  gas  filled );  and 

g)  Damage  to  auxiliaries. 

6.1.2  If  it  is  suspected  that  the  transformer  has  suffered  material  damage, 
suitable  action  shall  be  taken. 

6.1.2.1  Serious  damages — Serious  damages  should  be  reported  to  the 
manufacturer.  It  is  advisable  to  wait  till  the  representatives  of  both  the 
manufacturer  and  the  transporter  are  present  before  lifting  the  core  and 
coils  from  the  tank  for  further  inspection. 

6.1.2.2  Slight  damages  —  Damage  which  does  not  appear  to  be  serious 
but  which  indicates  heavy  knock  should  be  treated  with  caution.  The  core 
of  the  transformer  should  be  lifted  from  the  tank  in  the  presence  of  the 
representatives  of  both  the  manufacturer  and  the  transporter  and  examined 
for  any  damage  to  ensure  that  they  have  not  been  damaged.  The  report 
of  this  examination  should  be  made  to  manufacturer  as  well  as  to  the 
transporter. 

6.1.2.3  No  damage  —  If  there  are  no  external  damages,  it  is  advisable 
to  leave  the  transformer  in  its  tank  without  making  any  attempt  to  look 
inside. 

6.1.3  The  presence  of  rust  and  condensation  anywhere  either  within  or 
outside  the  tank  and  the  pink  colour  of  silicagel  breather  fitted  for  transport, 
provided  with  transformers  filled  with  dry  air,  indicates  possibility  of 
absorption  of  moisture  by  the  windings.  If  the  transformer  is  supplied 
filled  with  nitrogen  or  any  other  inert  gas,  its  pressure  should  be  checked 
in  accordance  with  the  temperature-pressure  chart  supplied  by  the 
manufacturer.  If  the  pressure  appears  to  be  either  high  or  low,  it  is 
possible  the  windings  may  have  absorbed  moisture  during  transit.  In  such 
cases  the  transformer  should  be  dried  out  in  accordance  with  the  pro- 
cedure laid  down  in  8.2. 

At  the  time  of  receipt,  oil  samples  from  the  top  of  the  conservator 
and  the  bottom  of  the  transformer  should  be  drawn  and  tested  for  presence 
of  moisture  and  also  for  dielectric  strength.  If  both  the  samples  are  free 
from  moisture  and  the  windings  indicate  satisfactory  insulation  resistance, 
generally  drying  out  may  not  be  necessary.  However,  if  it  is  desired  as  an 
additional  precaution,  the  transformers  may  be  dried  out  in  accordance 
with  the  procedure  laid  down. 

6-1.3.1  If  examination  as  given  in  6.1.3  indicates  ingress  of  moisture, 
the  transformer  shall  be  dried  under  vacuum,  filled  with  dry  nitrogen  or 
oil  and  stored.  The  oil  contained  in  the  transformer  on  receipt  shall  also 
be  filtered  before  storing.  Care  shall  be  taken  to  ensure  that  the  gaskets 
are  tightened. 

16 


IS  :  10028  ( Part  II)- 1981 

6.2  Storage  —  Transformers  received  at  site  and  not  expected  to  be 
installed  immediately  are  likely  to  absorb  moisture.  Indoor  type  trans- 
formers should  be  stored  under  cover  and  the  transformer  should  preferably 
be  filled  with  oil  to  reduce  the  extent  of  possible  condensation  of  moisture, 
and  the  breathing  pipe  should  be  plugged.  Transformers  which  are  requir- 
ed to  be  kept  in  storage  for  long  periods  should  preferably  be  drained  of  oil 
and  the  tanks  should  be  filled  with  dry  nitrogen  under  slight  pressure. 
However,  if  it  is  necessary  to  store  them  outdoors,  these  should  be  covered 
to  prevent  moisture  and  foreign  material  entering  into  the  tank.  When  it 
becomes  necessary  to  store  a  partially  or  completely  disassembled  transfor- 
mer the  core  and  the  coils  should  be  immersed  in  dry  oil,  and  stored  in  a 
dry  room  having  as  uniform  a  temperature  as  possible.  If  the  unit  is 
stored  outdoors  without  oil,  moisture  may  condense  in  the  tank  due  to 
variations  of  air  temperature  and  this  may  be  absorbed  by  the  windings. 
To  avoid  this,  it  should  be  filled  with  nitrogen  or  any  other  inert  gas. 

7.  INSTALLATION 

7.0  General  —  A  set  of  record  plans  should  be  provided  by  the  installation 
engineer  clearly  indicating  the  complete  layout  of  the  installation.  A 
schedule  of  the  works  to  be  carried  out  with  time  required  shall  be  charted 
out. 

7.1  Precautions 

7.1.1  As  far  as  possible  no  work  shall  be  done  during  rainy  season  to 
avoid  moisture  absorption  by  the  transformer. 

7.1.2  Extreme  care  shall  be  taken  to  prevent  any  foreign  material  from 
being  dropped  into  the  transformer.  Workmen  having  access  to  the 
interior  of  a  transformer  should  empty  their  pockets  of  all  loose  materials. 
Any  spanners  or  other  tools  used  shall  be  securely  tied  so  that  they  can  be 
recovered  easily  if  accidentally  dropped. 

7.1.3  Fibrous  cleaning  materials  shall  not  be  used.  The  presence  of 
loose  fibres  in  suspension  in  transformer  oil  can  reduce  materially  its 
insulating  properties. 

7.1.4  All  components  despatched  separately  shall  be  cleaned  inside  and 
outside  before  being  fitted. 

7.1.5  If  any  internal  temporary  transportation  braces  are  provided  they 
are  to  be  removed  without  disturbing  any  permanent  internal 
arrangements. 

7.1.6  The  transformer  shall  be  erected  on  a  level  foundation. 

7.2  Handling 

7.2.1  Transformers  should  be  lifted  by  the  lugs  or  shackles  provided  for 
the  purpose  and  simultaneous  use  should  be  made  of  all  such  lugs  or 

17 


IS:  10038  (Part  II) -1981 

shackles  in  order  to  avoid  any  unbalance  in  lifting.  Before  lifting  the 
complete  transformer,  it  should  be  ensured  that  all  cover  bolts  are 
tightened. 

7.2.2  Where  it  is  necessary  to  use  jacks  for  lifting,  the  projections 
provided  for  the  purpose  of  jacking  should  be  used.  Jacks  should  never 
be  placed  under  valves  or  cooling  tubes.  In  certain  circumstances,  in 
consultation  with  the  manufacturer,  jacks  may  be  placed  under  stiffening 
curbs  on  the  tank  base. 

7.2.3  Making  of  Leak-Proof  Joints 

7.2.3.1  Only  such  material  as  recommended  by  the  manufacturer 
should  be  used  for  the  gasket.  However,  if  no  recommendation  from  the 
manufacturer  is  available  gasket  may  be  made  of  high  grade  cork  or 
synthetic  material  like  neoprene  or  neoprene  bonded  cork.  The  surface 
should  be  thoroughly  cleaned  by  alcohol,  naphtha  or  any  other  cleansing  or 
degreasing  material  recommended  by  the  manufacturer.  Synthetic  material 
gaskets  do  not  require  any  sealing  compound  to  obtain  tight  joints.  It  may 
only  be  necessary  to  use  some  type  of  adhesive  compound  in  spots  on 
vertical  faces  to  retain  the  gasket  in  place  until  it  is  tightened.  Mechanical 
stops  are  generally  provided  to  limit  compression  of  the  gasket  material  to 
two-third  of  its  original  thickness. 

7.2.3.2  Medium  grained  cork  or  gasket  of  synthetic  material  is  reco- 
mmended for  use  with  unmachined  surfaces,  such  as  tank  bands  and 
covers;  and  hard  composition  cork  for  circular  gaskets,  such  as  those  under 
bushings  and  manhole  covers.  An  approved  gasketing  compound  should 
be  used  for  joints  made  of  cork.  Whenever  gaskets  are  not  made  in  one 
piece,  scarfed  or  dovetailed  joints  should  be  used  by  tapering  the  ends.  It 
is  advisable  to  use  file  or  sand  paper  to  smoothen  the  cut  after  it  is  made. 
When  tightening  the  cover  bolts,  they  should  be  tightened  with  care,  slowly 
and  uniformly  increasing  the  pressure  as  too  much  pressure  will  disrupt  the 
jointing  materials;  furthermore,  an  unevenly  compressed  gasket  may  spring 
up  a  leak. 

7.2.3.3  If  liquid  leaks  cannot  be  stopped  by  re-tightening,  new  gaskets 
should  be  used.  When  covers,  bushings  or  radiators  are  removed,  the  old 
gaskets  should  be  replaced  by  new  ones  when  the  unit  is  reassembled. 

7.2.3.4  Leaks  through  screw  joints,  such  as  nipples  ( if  due  to  poor 
threads )  are  remediable  only  by  rethreading  the  nipple  to  proper  dimen- 
sions, retapping  the  female  threads  and  cleaning  them  thoroughly.  A 
filler  which  is  insoluble  in  the  insulating  oil,  does  not  adversely  affect  it, 
does  not  shr  nk  and  remains  plastic,  should  be  used  for  threads. 

Note  —  Shellac  should  not  be  used  as  a  filler  since  it  shrinks  as  much   as  by 
50  percent  when  the  solvent  evaporates. 

18 


IS  :  10028  (  Part  II )  - 19^1 

7.3  Site  Preparation 

7.3.0  Since  all  electrical  installations  shall  comply  with  the  requirements 
of  the  Indian  Electricity  Act  and  Rules  made  thereunder,  it  is  essential  that 
they  are  complied  with.  The  provisions  of  the  Factories  Act  and  Rrles 
are  also  to  be  complied  with  to  the  extent  applicable. 

All  tools,  tackles  and  other  equipments  required  for  the  erection  work 
may  be  arranged  at  the  site  before  the  work  is  started.  The  list  of  items 
that  will  be  generally  required  is  given  in  Appendix  A. 

7.3.1  Indoor  Sites 

7.3.1.1  The  most  important  thing  to  be  ensured  with  transformer 
installed  indoors  is  proper  ventilation,  that  is,  free  moment  of  air  round 
all  the  four  sides.  The  level  of  the  transformer  base  should  be  higher  than 
the  highest  flood  and  storm  water  level  of  that  area. 

Note  1  —  As  a  thumb  rule,  an  area  of  at  least  2  m2  for  outlet  and  1  m*  for  inlet  per 
1  000  kVA  of  transformer  capacity  should  be  provided  in  the  sub-station.  For  large 
transformer  units,  it  may  not  be  practicable  to  design  the  sub-station  to  admit  the 
requisite  quantity  of  air  for  natural  circulation.  Therefore,  in  such  cases  fans  shall  be 
provided. 

Note  2  — Where  transformers  are  required  to  be  installed  in  basements,  special  care 
shall  be  taken  to  ensure  prevention  of  Hooding. 

7.3.1.2  The  transformers  should  be  kept  well  away  from  the  wall. 
The  minimum  recommended  spacing  between  the  walls  of  the  transformer 
periphery  from  the  point  of  proper  ventilation  have  been  shown  in  Fig.  2. 
However,  the  actual  spacing  may  be  different  than  those  given  in  Fig.  2, 
depending  on  the  circumstances,  such  as  access  to  the  accessories. 

7.3.1.3  The  site  should  be  so  chosen  that  it  is  not  normally  damp 
because  besides  corroding  the  tank  body  and  tubes,  the  dampness  may  find 
its  way  to  the  bushings  and  may  cause  them  to  flash  over.  There  shall  be 
no  chance  o[  water  dripping  either  on  the  transformer  or  anywhere  in  the 
transformer  room  itself.  Chemical  fumas,  particularly  acid  fumes,  should 
not  be  allowed  in  the  transformer  room  as  they  corrode  the  tank  and  also 
cause  the  oil  to  deteriorate. 

7.3.1.4  For  indoor  installations  the  air  inlets  and  outlets  shall  be  of 
adequate  sizes  and  so  placed  as  to  ensure  propsr  air  circulation  for  the 
efficient  cooling  of  the  transformers.  The  inlets  should  preferably  be  as 
near  the  floor  as  possible  and  the  outlets  as  high  as  the  building  allows  to 
enable  the  heated  air  to  escape  readily  and  be  replaced  by  cool  air. 

7.3.1.5  Minimum  clearance  between  the  highest  point  of  the  conser- 
vator tank  to  the  ceiling  of  the  transformer  room  should  be  sufficient  to 
remove  the  mounting  on  the  transformer  like  the  conservator.  However, 
this  clearance  should  not  be  less  than  0-5  m. 

39 


IS  ;  10028  ( Part  II )  - 1981 


2A  WALL  OM    ONE    SIDE 


♦ 

0-75 

t 

0-75 

2B  WALL-ON  TWO    SIDES 


2C  WALL  ON  THREE  SIDES 


I- 1-25  — 


2D   ENCLOSED   ROOM 


All  dimensions  in  metrci. 

Fig.  2    Minimum  Recommended  Spacing  Between  the  Walls 
and  Transformer  Periphery 

7.3.1.6  In  this  connection,  consideration  should  be  given  to  the  heat 
output  from  the  transformer  which  affects  the  surrounding  atmospheric 
temperature.  Approximate  heat  output  of  transformer,  when  delivering 
full  rated  load  for  different  ratings  of  the  transformer,  is  given  below: 


Rating 

kVA 

16 

25 

63 

100 

160 

200  to  1  000 


Heat  Output 
kW 

0'75 
1 
2 
3 
4 
2  -f  1-5  per  hundred  kVA 


NOTE  —  The    temperature   of  the   winding   should    not   exceed    limits   specified    in 
IS:2026(PartII)-1977.* 


•Specification  for  power  transformers:  Part  II  Temperature-rise  {first  re  virion  ). 

20 


IS:   10028 (Part  II) -1981 

7.3.1.7  The  transformer  should  be  so  installed  that  severe  vibrations  are 
not  transmitted  to  its  body. 

7.3.2  Outdoor  Sites  —  Only  transformers  designed  for  outdoor  use  should 
be  installed  outdoors.  In  case  of  locations  where  the  atmosphere  is  polluted, 
it  is  desirable  that  the  transformer  is  located  in  suitable  covered  shelter  to 
minimize  adverse  effects  of  polluted  atmosphere. 

7.4  Facilities  for  Maintenance 

7.4.1  In  the  case  of  heavy  units  of  equipment,  adequate  passageways, 
doorways,  or  trap  doors  should  be  provided,  where  practicable,  to  allow  the 
passage  of  the  equipment  to  its  operating  position.  The  possible  need  for 
facilities  for  removing  the  equipment  at  a  later  date  for  repairs  or  mainte- 
nance should  be  considered  in  relation  to  the  accessibility  of  the  equipment. 
For  lifting  the  transformer  core  and  handling  heavy  equipment,  it  is  often 
advisable  to  arrange  for  the  incorporation  of  a  lifting  beam  in  the  structure 
of  the  building,  the  beam  being  located  at  a  suitable  height  immediately 
over  such  parts  of  the  equipment  as  may  require  attention  and  being 
capable  of  supporting  the  maximum  weight  involved. 

7.4.2  The  transformer  should  be  so  installed  that  the  breather,  thermo- 
meter, oil  level  indicator  and  the  top  position  indicator  may  be  safely 
examined  with  the  transformer  energized. 

7.4.3  Sampling  valve  or  drain  valve  should  be  conveniently  arranged  for 
drawing  oil  samples. 

7.5  Foundations 

7.5.1  Since  the  transformers  operate  without  moving  parts,  generally  a 
simple  foundation  is  satisfactory  provided  it  is  firm,  horizontal  and  dry. 
The  transformer  should  not  rock  or  bed  down  unevenly  so  as  to  tilt,  as  this 
may  strain  the  connections.  The  base  should  be  horizontal  to  keep  the  oil 
level  correct. 

7.5.2  For  outdoor  installations,  a  level  concrete  plinth  above  the  maxi- 
mum flood  or  storm  water  level  of  the  site,  of  correct  size  to  accommodate 
the  transformer  in  such  a  way  so  that  no  person  may  step  on  the  plinth, 
with,  if  necessary,  bearing  plates  of  sufficient  size  and  strength,  should  be 
provided  for  transformers.  Where  rollers  are  fitted,  suitable  rails  or  tracks 
should  be  provided  and  when  the  transformer  is  in  the  final  position,  the 
wheels  should  be  locked  by  locks  or  other  means  to  prevent  accidental 
movement  of  the  transformer.  Where  full  height  partition  walls  are  built, 
adequate  clearances  as  for  indoor  transformers  should  be  provided. 

7.5.2.1  Flat  paving  stones  may  also  be  used  for  making  platforms 
provided  they  are  laid  on  a  firm  foundation  and  can  provide  drainage  and 
withstand  the  weight  of  the  transformer. 

21 


IS  :  10028  (  Part  II )  -  1981 

7.5.3  For  installing  pole-mounted  transformers,  as  far  as  possible, 
junction  poles,  subsidiary  poles,  and  street  lighting  poles  should  not  be 
used  as  transformer  poles.  Where  this  is  unavoidable,  special  care  should 
be  taken  to  maintain  proper  climbing  space  and  to  avoid  crowding  of  wire 
and  equipment.  Transformers  should  be  installed  only  on  poles  strong 
enough  to  carry  their  weight.  Transformer  poles  should  be  straight  and, 
where  necessary,  guyed  to  prevent  learning  or  raking  of  the  pole  after  the 
transformer  is  hung.  Double  cross-arms  should  be  provided  for  each 
transformer  installation.  The  climbing  space  should  be  carefully  main- 
tained so  that  it  should  not  be  necessary  for  a  lineman  to  come  close  to  the 
transformer  tank  in  climbing  up  or  down  a  pole.  A  suitable  anti- climbing 
device  should  be  provided. 

7.6  Cabling 

7.6.1  Cable  trenches  inside  sub-stations  and  switch  stations  containing 
cables  shall  be  filled  with  sand,  pebbles  or  similar  non-inflammable  materials, 
or  completely  covered  with  non-inflammable  slabs.  In  many  installations 
it  may  be  advisable,  for  reasons  of  ease  of  maintenance  to  locate  equipment 
centrally  with  cable  galleries  serving  the  purpose  of  cable  trenches. 

7.6.2  Cables  may  also  be  carried  along  the  walls  clamped  on  the  vertical 
supports  at  suitable  intervals  depending  on  the  cable  sizes.  The  cables, 
when  arranged  in  a  verticle  plane,  should  run  clear  off  the  walls.  Many 
types  of  special  clamps  for  this  purpose  are  now  available.  Where  a  large 
number  of  cables  have  to  be  carried  and  it  is  not  desirable  for  some  reason 
to  have  a  portion  of  the  wall  face  covered  with  cables,  these  may  be  run  in 
cable  trays  or  racks.  Where  a  number  of  cable  trays  or  racks  are  used,  the 
spacing  between  them  should  be  150  mm  or  more,  depending  on  the  cable 
sizes.  The  cables  should  be  laid  in  a  single  layer  and  the  routings  should 
be  preplanned  so  that  cross-overs  are  kept  to  minimum.  The  trays  may 
be  made  from  suitable  materials  such  as  galvanized  iron  or  aluminium 
sheets,  or  expanded  metal.  The  expanded  metal  affords  better  ventilation 
for  the  cable.  In  view  of  economy  and  compactness,  control  and  power 
cables  are  laid  in  the  same  trench;  care  shall  be  taken  to  segregate  them 
in  separate  racks,  with  the  control  cables  effectively  screened.  DC  control 
cables,  ac  power  circuits  and  instrument  transformer  circuits  shall  be 
segregated  from  one  another. 

7.6.3  The  cables  should  not  be  exposed  to  heat  from  other  equipment. 
The  cable  trenches  should  be  suitably  sloped  and  arrangements  should  be 
made  for  draining  them  or  preventing  them  from  getting  filled  with  water. 

7.7  Bushings  and  Cable  Boxes 

7.7.1  Bushings  —  If  bushings  are  removed  from  the  transformer,  they 
should  be  carefully  inspected  for  cracks  or  chips  before  installing  them  and 
making  sure  that  gaskets  are  in  proper  places.    Often  the  leads  are  trapped 

22 


IS:  10028  (Part  II).  1981 

between  two  nuts,  the  lirst  nut  holding  the  bushing  stem  while  the  second 
nut  holds  the  connection.  One  nut  should  be  held  with  a  thin  spanner 
whilst  tightening  the  other.  Nuts  or  bolts  which  exert  pressure  on  the 
porcelain  should  be  tightened  evenly  or  else  bushing  may  crack. 

7.7.2  Cable  Boxes  —  If  the  transformer  is  fitted  with  cable  boxes  and  is 
to  be  connected  by  cables,  the  cable  ends  should  be  sealed  to  prevent  their 
absorbing  moisture.  The  cable  boxes  should  be  filled  with  compound  or 
oil  as  required,  after  making  the  conections.  PVC  and  XLPE  cable  boxes 
need  not  be  filled  with  compound  or  oil. 

7.8  Connections 

7.8.1  Medium  Voltage  —  Both  cable  and  bare  connections  may  be  used. 
Where  cables  or  wires  other  than  metal-sheathed  or  armoured  cables  are  run 
in  metallic  casings,  all  three  phases  and  the  neutral  shall  be  run  in  the 
same  metallic  casing.  Where  metallic  casings  are  used,  no  joints  should  be 
made  in  the  cable  or  wire.  All  metallic  casings,  fittings,  sheathing  and 
armouring  shall  be  effectively  earthed. 

7.8.1.1  In  the  case  of  transformers  of  capacity  750  kVA  and  above, 
for  feeding  the  medium  voltage  supply,  the  method  of  connection  is  gene- 
rally by  single-core  lead  covered  cable.  Bus  Duct  connection  is  also  one 
of  the  desirable  practices. 

7.8.2  High  Voltage  —  The  connection  by  insulated  cables  for  the  high 
voltage  side  of  the  transformer,  if  laid  in  a  covered  trench  inside  a  building, 
shall  be  by  suitable  paper-insulated  lead-sheathed  and  armoured  or 
aluminium-sheathed,  or  other  suitable  types  of  cable.  If  the  connecting 
cable  is  paper-insulated  lead  covered  and  if  accessible  or  laid  in  ground,  it 
shall  be  armoured  or  provided  with  metallic  covering.  All  cable  boxes, 
and  metallic  sheathing  and  armouring  shall  be  efficiently  earthed.  Where 
bare  conductors  are  used  for  connections,  these  shall  be  inaccessible.  The 
conductors  and  their  supports  should  be  designed  to  safely  withstand 
stress  under  short-circuit  conditions. 

7.8.3  Bare  Connections  —  In  medium  and  high  voltage  sub-stations, 
particularly  where  the  magnitudes  of  currents  are  large,  bare  conductors  of 
copper  or  aluminium  may  have  to  be  used  for  connection  to  be  transformer 
terminals.  These  may  be  of  the  flexible  type  or  of  the  rigid  type  having 
rectangular  or  hollow  circular  cross-section.  Where  connections  are  rigid 
ana  more  than  3  to  4*5  m  long,  special  expansion  type  of  connectors  are 
recommended  to  prevent  the  terminal  bushings  being  unduly  stressed  due 
to  thermal  expansion.  If  aluminium  or  ACSR  conductors  are  used  for 
connection  to  the  transformer  terminals  made  of  copper,  suitable  bimetallic 
type  of  connectors  should  be  used  to  prevent  electrolytic  corrosion  at  the 
contact  surfaces  of  dissimilar  metals  and  necessary  precautions  taken  in 
making  these  joints. 

23 


IS  :  10028  (Part  II) -1981 

7.9  Precautions  against  Bisk  of  Fire 

7.9.1  In  order  to  limit  the  spread  of  fire  in  the  event  of  ignition,  insulat- 
ing oil,  oil  filled  switchgear  and  transformer  units  should  be  segregated  in 
groups  of  moderate  capacity;  where  the  size  and  importance  of  the  plant 
warrants  it,  this  may  be  achieved  by  segregation  in  separate  enclosure. 
Alternatively  fire-resisting  barriers  may  be  provided  between  transformers 
or  sections  of  switchgear.    ( see  Note  under  3.6.2  ). 

7.9.2  Cables  and  cable  trenches  shall  be  laid  in  accordance  with 
IS  :  2274-1963*  { see  a!so7.6 ). 

7.9.3  In  sub-stations  or  transformer  chambers  situated  below  blocks  of 
buildings  which  are  ordinarily  frequented  by  many  people  or  in  places 
where  the  fire  risk  is  considerable,  the  following  precautions  are  recom- 
mended: 

a)  The   structure  and,  in  particular,   any  partition  walls  or  doors 

should  be  of  such  construction  as  to  be  capable  of  resisting  the 
effects  of  fire  for  a  considerable  period,  and 

b)  Independent  ventilation  of  the  chamber  should  be  provided  and 
any  trunking  which  is  in  communication  with  other  parts  of  the 
building  should  be  excluded  therefrom.  Access  doors  to  the 
chambers  where  the  equipment  is  installed  should  be  provided. 

7.9.3.1  In  exceptional  cases  the  following  precautions  may  also  be 
taken: 

a)  Remote  indication  of  undue  rise  of  the  temperature  inside  the 

transformer  room, 

b)  Remote  disconnection  of  the  supply,  and 

c)  Fixed  automatic  fire-fighting  equipment  shall,  wherever  necessary 
be  installed.  The  fire  extinguishing  medium  (  for  example,  water 
spray,  foam  and  carbon  dioxide  )  and  the  means  and  methods  of 
applying  the  same  should  be  chosen  carefully  to  suit  each  installa- 
tion. Such  equipment  should  be  supplemented  by  suitable 
portable  extinguishers.  A  number  of  these  should  be  kept 
adjacent  to  but  not  inside  the  area  of  risk,  so  that  access  to  them 
is  not  impeded  when  a  fire  has  already  started. 

Note  —  The  importance  of  the  fire  extinguisher  to  be  used  for  various  types  of 
electrical  fires  cannot  be  overemphasized;  for  instance,  spraying  of  water  on  live  parts 
of  elect  ricaf  apparatus  on  fire  wouid  charge  the  pipe-work  and  may  endanger  the  Jive* 
of  fire  fighting  staff. 

'   7.9.4  For  large  outdoor  sub-stations,  protection  may  also  be  provided  by 
the  installation  of  a  sprinkler  system,  activated  by  fire-detecting  units. 

•Code  of  practice  for  electrical  wiring  installations  ( system  voltage  exceeding 
650  volts ) . 

24 


IS:  10028  (Part  II-)  1981 

7.9.5  Reference  may  be  made  to  IS  :  1646-1961*  for  general  guidance 
on  fire  safety. 

7.10  Safety  Precautions 

7.10.1  The  transformer  should  be  so  installed  that  there  is  no  risk  of 
anyone  receiving  an  electric  shock.  Although,  with  all  metal  parts  of  the 
metal  tank  bonded  together  and  properly  earthed,  the  tank  may  be  consi- 
dered quite  safe,  yet  consideration  should  be  given  to  the  arrangement  of 
the  connections. 

7.10.2  With  the  use  of  cable  boxes  and  terminal  boxes  or  suitable  bushings 
the  terminals  are  well  protected.  However,  if  the  metal  ends  of  the 
bushings  are  exposed,  precautions  shall  be  taken  to  protect  the  persons 
working  near  the  transformer  from  accidentally  touching  the  live  parts. 
For  complete  safety,  it  may  be  necessary  to  provide  an  enclosure  to  the 
transformer  with  door  or  gate  which  may  be  kept  locked  when  the 
transformer  is  energized. 

7.11  Oil 

7.11.1  When  oil  is  despatched  to  site  separately,  it  is  usuaiiy  in  sealed 
drums.  At  the  time  of  filling  the  drums,  it  shall  be  ensured  that  the  oil  is 
filtered,  clean  and  dry.  The  oil  to  be  used  for  filling  or  topping  up  shall 
comply  with  IS  :  335-1972t.  Insulating  oils  complying  with  IS  :  335-1972f 
are  supplied  for  electrical  equipment,  but  from  the  time  the  oil  is  received, 
it  is  subjected  to  deterioration  or  contamination  in  storage,  or  in  handling. 
Causes  of  oil  deterioration,  and  recommendation,  for  supervision  tests  are 
made  in  IS:  1866-1978J. 

7.11.2  Sampling  —  The  condition  of  oil  should  be  checked  before  use. 
Both  water  and  water-saturated  oil  are  heavier  than  clean  and  dry  oil,  and 
sink  to  the  bottom  of  the  container.  Samples  of  oil  from  the  transformer 
should  be  taken  from  the  bottom  of  the  tank.  When  samples  are  taken 
from  drum,  they  should  be  taken  from  the  bottom  only  after  the  oil  has 
been  allowed  to  settle  at  least  for  24  hours. 

7.11.2.1  Receptacles  for  samples  —  Receptacles  for  samples  should 
preferably  be  bottles  of  clear  glass  with  ground  glass  stoppers  and  of  1  litre 
capacity.  Sample  bottles  should  not  be  filled  to  the  top.  They  shall  be 
clean  and  dry.  If  the  electrical  test  cannot  be  carried  out  immediately,  these 
bottles  shall  be  hermetically  sealed  to  prevent  contamination  of  oil  while 
awaiting  the  test.  Touching  the  inside  of  a  receptacle  with  a  damp  hand  or 
wiping  round  with  an  apparently  clean  dry  cloth  may  seriously  reduce  the 
break  down  strength  of  a  sample  of  good  oil. 

•Code  of  practice  for  fire  safety  of  buildings  (  general ) ;  Electrical  installations. 
fSpecification  for  new  insulating  oils  for  transformers  and  switchgear  (  secmd  revision  ), 
JGode    of   practice    for    maintenance    and    supervision   of    insulating   oil    in   service 
{first  revision ). 

25 


IS:  10028  (  Part  II)-  1981 

7.11.2.2  Samples  from  tank  —  When  taking  samples  from  the  tank, 
remove  all  dirt  from  the  sampling  valve  or  plug.  To  ensure  that  the  valve 
is  clean,  allow  some  oil  to  flow  into  a  separate  receptacle  before  collecting 
samples  for  testing.  Sample  should  be  collected  in  clear  glass  receptacles 
so  that  any  water  present  settles  at  the  bottom  of  the  receptacle  and  is 
clearly  visible. 

7.11.2.3  Samples  from  oil  drums  —  Before  taking  samples  from  an  oil 
drum  the  drum  shall  have  been  allowed  to  stand  with  the  bung  vertically 
upwards  for  at  least  24  hours.  The  area  around  the  bung  should  then  be 
cleaned  carefully.  A  clean  glass  or  brass  tube  long  enough  to  reach  within 
15  mm  of  the  lowermost  part  of  the  drum  should  be  inserted,  keeping  the 
uppermost  end  of  the  tube  tightly  closed  with  the  thumb.  The  thumb 
should  then  be  removed  to  allow  oil  to  enter  the  bottom  of  the  tube.  The 
top  of  the  tube  should  again  be  tightly  closed  and  the  oil  sample  withdrawn. 
The  first  two  samples  should  be  discarded.  Thereafter  the  samples  should  be 
released  into  a  suitable  receptacle. 

7.11.3  Testing  —  The  samples  of  oil  shall  be  tested  in  accordance  with 
IS  :  335-1972*. 

7.12  Filling  Transformers  with  Oil 

7.12.1  Before  filling  with  oil,  transformer  should  be  fitted  with  all 
accessories,  such  as  valves,  gauges,  thermometers  and  plugs  and  made 
oil-tight.  Oil  samples  should  be  taken  and  tested  before  filling  the 
transformer  tank.  It  should  be  ensured  in  oil  filling  operation  that  no  air 
pockets  are  left  in  the  tank,  that  no  dust  or  moisture  enters  the  oil  and  that 
it  is  at  least  as  warm  as  the  surrounding  air.  All  air  vents  should  be 
opened.  Oil  should  be  filled  through  centrifuge  or  metal  hoses  or  other 
hose  pipes  of  synthetic  material  resistant  to  transformer  oil.  Rubber  hoses 
should  not  be  used  since  the  sulphur  in  the  rubber  would  dissolve  in  oil, 
causing  the  dielectric  strength  of  the  oil  to  be  lowered  and  also,  the 
dissolved  sulphur  would  attack  the  copper  in  the  windings.  If  no  filters 
are  available,  other  means  of  straining  the  oil,  such  as  two  or  more  layers 
of  muslin  cloth  thoroughly  washed  and  dried  to  remove  the  sizing,  may  be 
used.  To  prevent  aeration  of  the  oil,  the  transformer  tank  should  be  filled 
through  the  bottom  drain  valve.  In  a  conservator  type  of  transformer,  the 
rate  of  oil  flow  should  be  reduced  when  the  level  is  almost  up  to  the 
bottom  of  the  main  cover  to  prevent  internal  pressure  from  rupturing  the 
relief-pipe  diaphragm.  Sufficient  time  should  be  allowed  ( 12  to  24  hours ) 
for  the  oil  to  permeate  the  transformers  and  also  the  locked-up  air  bubbles 
to  escape.  Any  air  accumulated  in  the  Buchholtz  relay  should  be  released. 
The  sides  of  the  transformer  tank  may  be  tapped  with  a  hammer  on  all 
sides  to  release  locked  up  air.  An  alternate  method  for  removing  the 
trapped  air  from  large  transformers  is  to  keep  the  transformer  energized  at 

•Specification  for  new  insulating  oils  for  transformers  and  switchgear  {second  revision). 

26 


IS:  10028  (Part II) -1981 

no  load  for  about  6  to  12  hours  at  the  end  of  which  the  air  cocks  on  the 
transformer  are  opened  to  allow  the  released  air  to  escape. 

7.12.2  Vacuum  filling  may  be  used  for  large  transformer  with  tanks 
designed  to  withstand  full  vacuum.  A  vacuum  pump  may  be  connected  to 
the  top  valve  of  the  transformer  and  the  oil  hose  to  the  top  filter  press 
valve.  The  tank  shall  be  tightly  sealed  and  evacuated  to  approximately 
700  mm  of  mercury  and  the  vacuum  maintained  for  2  hours  or  longer 
depending  on  the  size  and  voltage  of  the  transformer.  The  oil  valve  may 
then  be  opened  and  the  oil  allowed  to  flow  slowly  into  the  tank.  The 
vacuum  should  be  maintained  for  a  short  time  after  the  tank  is  full.  While 
evacuating  the  transformer  tank,  the  diaphram  or  pressure  releasing 
devices  of  the  explosion  vent  should  be  removed  and  replaced  by  a  blanking 
plate  so  as  to  avoid  rupture  while  drawing  vacuum,  and  while  filling  oil  to 
break  the  vacuum.  Care  should  be  exercised  to  see  that  large  bakelite 
panels  such  as  those  used  for  load-ratio  control  units,  are  not  subjected  to 
pressure  (both  sides  of  the  panel  may  be  connected  to  equalize  the 
pressure ). 

8.  DRYING  OF  TRANSFORMERS 

8.0  If  as  a  result  of  tests  carried  out  in  accordance  with  7.11.3  presence  of 
moisture  is  indicated  or  the  oil  does  not  withstand  the  tests  as  recommen- 
ded by  the  manufacturer  or  the  insulation  resistance  readings  are  not 
satisfactory,  it  shall  be  necessary  to  dry  out  the  transformer. 

8.1  Precautions  When  Drying 

8.1.1  Only  spirit  type  thermometers  are  to  be  used  for  temperature 
measurement.  Mercury  thermometers  shall  not  be  used  anywhere  except  in 
the  pockets  provided  for  this  purpose. 

8.1.2  The  maximum  sustained  temperature  to  which  transformer  oil 
should  be  subjected  is  85°C.  Therefore,  the  maximum  sustained  temper- 
ature to  which  anything  in  contact  with  the  oil  should  be  raised,  is  90°C 
{see  8.2.1). 

8.1.3  In  no  case  should  the  transformer  be  left  unattended  during  any 
part  of  the  dryout  period.  The  transformer  should  be  carefully  watched 
throughout  the  dry  out  process  and  all  observations  shall  be  carefully 
recorded. 

8.1.4  It  is  recommended  to  keep  fire-fighting  equipment  ready  during 
the  dry-out  period.  Naked  lights  and  flames  should  be  kept  away  while 
the  drying  operation  is  in  progress. 

8.2  Methods  of  Drying 

8.2.0  There  are  a  number  of  approved  methods  of  drying  out  transformer 
core  and  coils.    If  the  drying  out  processs   is    carelessly    or  improperly 

27 


IS  :  10028  ( Part  II )  - 1981 

performed,  great  damige  may  result  to  the  transformer  insulation  through 
over-heating.  The  methods  generally  adopted  are  described  in  8.2.1,  8.2.2 
and  8.2.3. 

8.2.1  Drying  with  Core  and  Coils  in  OH  by  the  Short-Circuit  Method 

8.2.1.1  This  method  is  well  suited  for  core  type  transformers  but  is 
not  recommended  for  shell-type  transformers  because  of  the  mass  and 
locations  of  fibrous  materials  used.  The  oil  should  be  lowered  a  few 
centimetres  below  the  cover  and  the  windings  should  then  be  heated  by 
short-circuiting  one  of  them  by  means  of  connection  suitable  for  the  full 
load  current  of  the  shorted  winding  and  applying  a  suitable  voltage  on 
the  other.  If  the  required  power  is  to  be  obtained  from  a  long  overhead 
transmission  line,  suitable  protection  against  over-voltages  should  be  provi- 
ded to  avoid  damage  to  the  transformer  during  the  dry  out  period.  The 
success  of  this  method  depends  upon: 

a)  correct  loading  to  maintain  the  temperature  of  windings  and 
insulation  within  safe  limits, 

b)  correct  oil  temperature  by  reducing  the  normal  load, 

c)  thorough  ventilation  to  remove  water  vapour  given  off  by  the  hot 
oil, 

d)  thorough  lagging  of  the  cover  to  prevent  condensation  of  moisture, 
and 

e)  careful  filtering  and  dielectric  strength  tests  of  the  oil  to  determine 
when  the  transformer  is  dry. 

8.2.1.2  The  diaphragms  of  relief  pipe  should  be  removed  and  the 
manhole  covers  should  be  removed  or  raised  about  15  cm  to  allow  moist 
air  to  escape.  All  openings  should  be  protected  from  the  weather.  The 
top  of  the  main  cover  and  relief  pipe  should  be  thoroughly  lagged.  Radia- 
tion from  radiators  or  tubes  may  be  prevented  by  lowering  the  oil  below 
the  top  inlets.  If  radiators  are  provided  with  valves,  the  top  valve  may  be 
closed  to  prevent  circulation.  Both  the  valves  should  not  be  closed  since 
high  pressure  caused  due  to  expansion  may  damage  the  valves.  If  the 
transformers  are  provided  with  taps,  the  connections  should  be  so  made 
that  all  the  winding  is  in  the  circuit  so  that  the  entire  winding  may  be  dried. 
Filtering  the  oil  will  aid  materially  in  removing  the  moisture  and  hasten  the 
process  of  drying. 

8.2.1.3  The  more  important  points  concerning  the  method  of  drying 
on  which  attention  is  to  be  focussed  are  the  following: 

a)  Importance  of  continuing  the  drying  out  process  without  a  break, 
maintaining  the  temperature  of  the  oil  in  the  transformer  at  a 
specified  value  of  say  80*C.  It  may  take  weeks  in  some  cases 
before  the  drying  out  is  completed. 

28 


IS  :  10028  (  Part  II )  -  1981 

b)  Maintaining  a  log  shcei. 

c)  Introducing  a  purifier  of  the  centrifugal  or  vacuum  type  provided 
with  suitable  heating  elements  and  thermostat  in  addition  to  the 
heating  of  oil  by  the  short-circuit  method.  The  thermostat  on 
the  purifier  is  usually  set  to  maintain  an  outlet  temperature  of 
90°C.  .  Oil  is  drawn  from  the  transformer  tank  through  a  pipe 
dipped  to  the  bottom  and  delivered  back  into  the  transformer  tank 
at  the  top.  The  purifier  has  also  to  work  continuously  excepting 
for  about  an  hour  per  day  when  it  is  opened  up  for  cleaning  the 
cones  in  the  case  of  the  centrifugal  type  or  the  filter  pads  in  the 
case  of  the  vacuum  type. 

d)  In  extreme  cases  where  the  dielectric  strength  of  oil  fails  to 
improve  despite  this  treatment  over  a  period  of  15  to  20  days,  it 
may  become  necessary  to  blow  a  gentle  stream  of  hot  air  at  a 
temperature  of  about  150°C  in  the  space  between  the  top  of  the 
oil  and  the  covering  of  the  tank  which  is  normally  lifted  for 
ventilation  purposes. 

Note  — It  is  preferable  to  record  the  resistance  value  of  each  transformer  winding 
before  and  after  the  heat-run  test  in  order  to  calculate  the  maximum  temperature  of 
the  winding  and  compare  it  with  the  oil  temperature  tn  order  to  ensure  that  no 
abnormal  conditions  occur  during  the  drying  process. 

8.2.1.4  The  following  table  shows  the  short-circuit  current  in  percent 
of  full  load  current  which  may  be  used  for  this  method  of  drying  of  trans- 
formers with  the  corresponding  maximum  allowance  of  top  oil  temperature. 
Usually  Jess  than  5  percent  of  normal  voltage  will  give  sufficient  current 
circulation  in  the  windings.  These  temperature  limits  and  loads  shall  be 
strictly  adhered  to  in  order  to  obtain  desired  results  without  damage  to 
transformers. 

Self-Cooled 
Transformers 

Percent 
50 
75 
85 

Note  —  It  may  be  noted  that  the  higher  the  allowable  oil  temperature,  the  smaller 
the  load;  which  means  that  additional  blanketing  of  the  tank  or  reduced  use  of  artificial 
cooling  is  required  for  the  smaller  currents  than  for  higher  currents  in  order  to  bring 
the  oil  temperature  up  to  the  values  shown  in  the  above  table. 

8.2.1.5  Drying  should  be  continued  until  oil  from  the  top  and  the 
bottom  of  tank  withstands  the  voltage  values  given  in  Col  7  SI  No.  1  of 
Table  1  of  IS  :  1866-1978*,    for  7  consecutive  tests  taken  4  hours  apart 

•Code  of  practice  for  maintenance  and  supervision  of  insulating  oils  in  service  ( first 
revision  ). 

29 


Water-Cooled 
Transformers 

Percent 

Top-Oil 
Temperature,  Max 

°C 

50 
60 

75 

85 
80 
75 

IS  :  10028  ( Part H)- 1981 

Oil  should  be  maintained  at  the  maximum  temperature  for  the  load  held 
without  filtering.  All  ventilating  openings  should  then  be  closed  and  the 
transformer  kept  at  the  same  temperature  for  another  24  hours  without 
filtering  the  oil  and,  as  before,  the  oil  should  be  tested  at  4-hour  intervals. 
A  decrease  in  the  dielectric  strength  of  the  oil  indicates  that  moisture  is 
still  passing  from  the  transformer  into  the  oil.  Unless  constant  or  increas- 
ing dielectric  strength  is  shown  by  the  tests,  the  ventilators  should  be  kept 
open,  the  oil  filtered  and  the  drying  continued,  till  dielectric  strength  of  oil 
and  the  insulation  resistance  of  winding  are  together  satisfactory. 

8.2.2  Drying  with  Oil  Removed 

8.2.2.1  By  external  heat  —  The  transformer  may  be  placed  in  its  own 
tank  without  oil.  Extern  illy  heated  air  is  blown  into  the  tank  at  the  bottom 
through  the  main  oil  valve.  A  small  blower  or  fan  should  be  used  to  get 
the  proper  circulation.  It  is  necessary  to  force  as  much  of  the  heated  air 
as  possible  through  the  ducts  in  the  transformer  windings.  To  accomplish 
this,  baffles  should  be  placed  between  the  core  and  the  case,  closing  off  as 
much  of  the  space  as  possible.  The  best  way  to  obtain  the  heated  air  is  by 
blowing  air  through  grid  resistors.  The  resistors  should  be  placed  in  a  fire- 
proof bDX.  The  temperature  of  the  air  entering  from  the  grid  should  not 
exceed  115°C.  Measure  the  temperature  of  the  windings  frequently  by 
resistance  measurements  to  make  sure  that  the  transformer  is  not  over- 
heated. 

The  heat  may  also  be  obtained  by  direct  combustion  and  it  is  essential 
that  none  of  the  products  of  combustion  be  allowed  to  enter  into  the 
transformer  tank.  Heating  the  air  by  combustion  is  not  recommended 
except  where  electric  current  is  not  available. 

If  for  any  reason  it  is  not  expedient  to  place  the  transformer  in  its 
own  tank,  it  may  be  placed  in  a  wooden  box  with  holes  near  the  bottom 
and  top  for  circulating  warm  air.  The  same  precautions  as  given  for 
drying  in  its  own  tank  should  be  taken  to  see  that  the  air  is  forced  to 
circulate  through  the  oil  ducts  in  the  insulation. 

It  is  essential  that  every  precaution  be  taken  to  prevent  fire  when 
drying  out  by  this  method.  The  set-up  shall  be  watched  very  carefully 
during  the  enrire  drying  operation.  If  the  blower  should  stop,  the  grid 
current  should  be  switched  off  at  once  to  prevent  overheating. 

8.2.2.2  By  both  external  and  interna]  heat  —  This  is  a  combination  of 
methods  given  in  8.2.2.1  and  8.2.2.2.  The"transformer  should  be  placed  in 
its  own  tank,  if  possible,  and  all  precautions  taken  as  outlined  under 
8.2.2.2.  The  current  circulated  in  the  windings  should,  of  course,  be  less 
than  that  when  drying  out  is  done  in  accordance  with  8.2.2.1  only. 

30 


IS  :  10028  ( Part  n  )  - 1981 

8.2.3  Drying  Under  Vacuum 

8.2.3.1  The  vacuum  method  employing  external  heat  is  a  quick  and 
most  effective  way  of  drying  transformer's  insulation,  where  it  can  be  used. 

Note — Drying  of  transformers  by  interna]  heat  should  not  be  resorted  to  with  the 
oil  removed. 

8.2.3.2  Many  large  transformers  may  be  dried  in  their  own  tanks  by 
this  method  if  the  tanks  can  safely  withstand  the  external  pressures  resulting 
from  a  vacuum  of  635  mm  or  more.  Line  and  short-circuit  connections 
may  be  made  at  the  terminal  bushing  outside  the  tank,  although  when 
transformers  have  not  been  completely  assembled,  it  is  sometimes  a  better 
practice  to  connect  to  the  high  voltage  windings  through  the  low  voltage 
bushings  and  short-circuit  the  low  voltage  windings  inside  the  tank. 

8.2.3.3  Temperature  indicator  leads  for  windings  not  connected  to 
terminal  bushings  may  be  brought  out  through  spark  plugs  tapped  into 
temporary  blank  covers. 

8.2.3.4  Except  for  the  vacuum-tight  tank,  the  drying  procedure  shall, 
in  general,  follow  that  described  for  the  short-circuit  method  for  transfor- 
mers less  than  5  000  kVA,  66  kV.  For  transformers  of  rating  5  000  kVA 
and  above,  or  voltage  66  kV  and  above,  it  may  be  necessary  to  use  addi- 
tional means  to  distribute  the  heat  to  all  parts  of  the  insulation. 

8.2.3.5  One  method  of  distributing  the  heat  is  to  blow  hot  air  through 
the  transformer  in  addition  to  circulating  current  in  the  windings.  This 
makes  use  of  external  and  internal  heat.  Another  method  is  to  cover  the 
coils  and  insulation  with  oil  to  distribute  the  heat  to  the  insulation  and  to 
heat  by  circulating  current  in  windings.  With  both  methods  the  maximum 
temperature  of  the  insulation  should  be  raised  slowly  to  approximately 
55°C  in  the  first  8  hours;  to  65°C  in  the  second  8  hours,  and  75  to  80°C  in 
the  third  8  hours.  After  75  or  80°C  temperature  has  been  reached,  the 
transformer  should  be  disconnected  from  the  source  of  power  and  if  oil  is 
used  to  distribute  the  heat,  the  oil  should  be  drained  out  and  a  vacuum 
applied  immediately.  The  vacuum  should  be  a  minimum  of  635  mm,  but 
preferably  710  mm.  The  vacuum  should  be  maintained  until  the  transfor- 
mer is  dry  or  until  the  temperature  drops  to  50°C  when  the  heat  shall  be 
applied  again  and  the  cycle  repeated.  Megger  readings  should  be  taken 
every  3  or  4  hours  and  the  drying  process  continued  until  the  megger 
readings  rise  and  become  constant. 

Note  —  Megger  reading*  shall  not  be  taken  under  vacuum . 

8.2.3.6  The  drying  time  after  the  vacuum  has  been  obtained  may  vary 
from  8  to  1 50  hours  or  longer  depending  on  the  temperature,  vacuum,  size 
and  conditions  of  the  transformer,  and  the  drying  set-up.  After  the 
transformer  is  once  thoroughly  heated,  it  is  possible  to  keep  the  temperature 
up  by  circulating  a  low  current  (usually  10  to  20  percent  of  the  normal) 

31 


IS:  10028  (Part  II) -1981 

periodically  for  a  short  time.  Check  the  temperature  often.  The  tempera- 
ture rise  of  copper  in  vacuum  may  be  very  rapid  and  the  insulation  may 
be  overheated  unless  extreme  caution  is  used  until  the  amount  and  time  of 
heating  are  determined  by  measurement.  The  temperature  of  the  copper 
shall  be  checked  by  resistance  measurement  as  there  is  no  other  satisfactory 
method  to  measure  copper  temperature  when  the  coils  are  in  vacuum.  If 
the  current  is  circulated  in  the  windings  under  vacuum,  the  voltage  should 
be  kept  to  a  minimum  because  the  dielectric  strength  of  air  under  partial 
vacuum  is  low.  For  this  reason,  it  is  generally  better  to  short-circuit  the 
high  voltage  winding  and  circulate  the  current  from  the  low  voltage  winding. 

Note  — ■  The  choice  of  winding  to  be  short-circuited  mainly  depends  on  convenience 
and  no  recommendation  i«  made  on  the  same. 

8.2.3.7  It  is  inevitable  that  in  the  process  of  drying,  insulation  resis- 
tance values  will  be  measured  at  varying  temperatures.  In  order  to,  there- 
fore, get  consistent  and  correct  picture  of  the  drying  process,  the  insulation 
resistance  values  corresponding  to  a  constant  temperature  shall  be  plotted 
on  the  graph. 

9.  MEASUREMENT  OF  INSULATION  RESISTANCE 

9.1  General  —  The  measurement  of  insulation  resistance  is  of  importance 
in  determining  the  status  of  drying  only  when  the  transformer  is  without 
oil.  If  the  initial  insulation  resistance  is  measured  at  ordinary  temperature, 
it  may  be  high  although  the  insulation  is  not  dry,  but  as  the  transformer  is 
heated  up,  the  insulation  resistance  value  drops  rapidly. 

9.1.1  As  the  drying  proceeds  at  a  constant  temperature,  the  insulation 
resistance  will  generally  increase  gradually  until  towards  the  end  of  the 
drying  period  when  the  increase  becomes  more  rapid.  Sometimes  the 
resistance  rises  and  falls  through  a  short  range  one  or  more  times  before 
reaching  a  steady  high  point  which  is  caused  by  moisture  in  the  interior 
parts  of  the  insulation  working  its  way  out  through  the  outer  portions 
which  were  dry  at  the  beginning. 

9.1.2  As  the  temperature  varies,  the  insulation  resistance  aiso  varies 
greatly.  Therefore,  the  temperature  should  be  kept  nearly  constant  and 
the  resistance  measurements  should  all  be  taken  at  as  nearly  the  same 
temperature  as  possible.  The  insulation  resistance  in  megohms  varies 
inversely  with  the  temperature  and  for  a  10°C  change  of  temperature  the 
megohms  change  by  ratio  generally  in  the  range  of  2  :  I  to  I  4  :  I.  Measure- 
ments should  be  taken  every  2  hours  during  the  drying  period. 

9.1.3  The  insulation  resistance  should  be  measured  by  at  least  1  000  V 
megger.     Every  time  the  voltage  should  be  applied  for  1  minute. 

9.2  Insulation  Resistance  Curve—  A  curve  of  the  insulation  resistance 
measurements  helps  in  determining  the  drying  time.    It  should  be  nlotted 

32 


IS  :  10028  ( Part  II )  -  1981 

with  time  as  abscissae  and  resistance  as  ordinate.  By  observation,  the 
time  of  the  curve  (the  point  where  the  insulation  resistance  begins  to 
increase  more  rapidly  )  may  be  determined  and  the  run  should  continue 
until  constant  for  24  hours  at  a  value  as  great  or  greater  than  suggested. 
It  is  recommended  that  the  record  of  readings,  including  time,  temperature 
and  megohms,  be  submitted  to  the  transformer  manufacturer  for  comments 
before  discontinuing  drying,  if  adequate  facilities  for  interpretation  of 
megger  readings  do  not  exist  with  the  user. 

9.2.1  The  insulation  resistance  should  be  taken  with  all  windings  earthed 
except  the  one  being  tested. 

Note  — The  question  of  specifying  recommended  insulation  resistance  values  is 
under  consideration.  In  the  meanwhile,  manufacturers  should  provide  the  insulation 
resistance  value  measured  at  the  works  so  that  any  subsequent  measurement  of  the 
insulation  resistance  could  be  related  to  this.  The  curve  of  insulation  resistance  value 
against  time  generally  takes  the  form  as  shown  in  Fig.  3. 


t 

!/ 

\ 

/ 

« 

I 

j 

z     ^ 

\ 

1 

/ 

* 

to      — 

111 

\ 

/ 

z 

\ 

/ 

o 

5 

\ 

— 4 

/ 

J- 

\ 

/ 

z 

\ 

f 

\ 

s^ 

TIME * 

Fio.  3    Curve  Showing  Variation  of  Insulation  Resistance 
with  Time  of  Drying 

10.  IMPORTANT     FITTINGS    AND    ACCESSORIES    AND    THEIR 
INSTALLATION 

10.1  Gaskets 

10.1.1  Whenever  blanking  plates  are  removed  to  fix  detached  parts  such 
as  bushing,  turrets,  etc,  a  new  gasket  shall  be  used  while  fixing  the  same. 
A  set  of  new  unused  gaskets  of  correct  size  and  thickness  is  supplied  with 
every  transformer  for  this  purpose.    Gaskets  shall  be  stored  in  hermetically 


33 


IS  :  10028  ( Part  II )  -  1981 

scaled  containers  in  a  cool  place.  They  shali  be  protected  from  damp,  oil 
and  grease.  To  make  a  gasketed  joint,  first  clean  the  metal  surfaces 
ensuring  that  they  are  free  from  oil,  rust  scale,  etc.  Then  a  film  of  the 
special  gasket  adhesive  if  supplied  by  the  manufacturer  may  be  applied  to 
one  of  the  surfaces.  The  gasket  may  be  then  stuck  to  the  surface  after  the 
lapse  of  a  few  minutes.  The  other  metai  surface  may  also  be  given  a  film 
of  adhesive  and  placed  over  the  gasket.  Both  may  then  be  tightened 
according  to  the  special  instructions  of  the  manufacturer. 

10.2  Bushings 

10.2.1  Normally  three  types  of  bushings  are  used: 

a)  Plain  porcelain  type, 

b)  Plain  oil-filled  type,  and 

c)  Condenser  type. 

10.2.2  The  bushings  shali  be  checked  for  any  damage  at  the  oil  end  as 
well  as  the  porcelains  before  fixing,  bushings  shall  be  cleaned  thoroughly. 
The  bushings  shall  be  lifted  by  using  the  lifting  eyes  and  soft  manila  ropes. 
Wire  ropes  or  slings  shall  not  be  used.  The  line  lead  of  H.V.  winding  if 
coiled  inside  the  transformer  is  drawn  through  the  bushing  using  a  string 
when  the  bushing  is  lowered  into  position.  The  cable  ferrule  is  fixed  in 
position  at  the  top  of  the  bushing  brass  tube.  The  lower  end  of  the 
bushing  shall  be  inspected  through  the  inspection  cover  for  proper  sealing. 
The  line  connection  should  be  tight  and  should  not  strain  the  terminals. 
Sufficient  flexibility  in  the  connecting  leads  should  also  be  provided  to 
avoid  mechanical  stress  on  the  bushing.  The  arcing  horns  if  any  shall  be 
in  proper  position  as  shown  by  the  supplier  in  general  arrangement 
drawing. 

10.3  Tap  Changers 

10.3.0  Change  over  switch  or  link  arrangement  provided  in  a  multi-ratio 
transformer  has  to  be  checked  for  proper  ratio. 

10.3.1  Off-Circuit  Tap  Switch—  The  off-circuit  tap  switch  form  an 
integral  part  of  the  transformer.  Since  the  operation  is  to  be  carried  out 
from  outside,  the  operating  handle  may  at  times  be  despatched  separately. 
This  has  to  be  fitted  as  per  manufacturer's  instructions.  Care  has  to  be  taken 
to  have  correct  alignment  of  the  handle.  The  tap  number  on  the  outside 
should  correlate  with  the  actual  position  of  tap  changer.  This  is  confirmed 
when  the  ratio  tests  are  done. 

Before  changing  taps,  isolate  the  transformer  from  supply  on  all 
windings.  In  no  case  should  the  tap  switch  handle  be  left  half  way  and 
unlocked  to  prevent  damage  due  to  inadvertent  operation. 

10.3.2  On-Load  Tap  Changers —  If  the  tap  changer  is  despatched 
separately  from  works,  it  is  to  be  fitted  on  the  tank.    Before  mounting  on 

34 


IS  :  10028  (  Part  II )  -  1981 

the  tank,  the  insulation  resistance  value  of  each  tap  changer  leads  to  earth 
should  be  measured  and  in  case  of  low  value,  the  cause  should  be 
investigated.  The  leads  from  the  tap  changers  are  then  connected  to  their 
respective  position  on  the  terminal  board  provided  on  the  tank.  The  tight- 
ness of  all  connections  on  the  selector  switch  and  terminal  board  is 
ensured. 

The  tap  changer  is  then  to  be  filled  with  clean  oil  and  drying  out  is 
to  be  carried  out.  Oil  filling  and  drying  out  is  carried  out  simultaneously 
along  with  the  transformer  as  explained  earlier. 

10.4  Cooling  Equipments 

10.4.1  The  cooling  equipments  and  associated  pipe- work  and  fittings  are 
to  be  thoroughly  cleaned  and  flushed  with  clean  dry  transformer  oil  before 
assembly.  The  pressure  gauges,  differential  pressure  gauges  etc,  if  any,  are 
fitted  in  position.  The  cooler  and  associated  pipework  is  then  filled  with 
clean  dry  oil  keeping  all  the  cooler  circuit  open,  except  the  transformer  inlet 
and  outlet  valves.  Air  is  released  from  all  the  pipework  during  filling.  The 
oil  is  circulated  through  a  filter  press  using  the  filter  valves  provided  in  the 
cooler  inlet  and  outlet  branches. 

The  cooler  control  circuit  is  to  be  checked  for  correct  operation  in 
all  positions  of  the  selector  switch.  Test  push  buttons  are  provided  for 
checking  of  the  working  of  motors  individually.  The  cooler  system  is  then 
connected  to  the  main  tank  by  opening  the  tank  inlet  and  outlet  valves. 

10.4.2  Cooling  Fans  —  Cooling  fans  are  mounted  as  per  manufacturer's 
instructions.  The  fans  are  tested  for  insulation  value  and  normal  running 
before  they  are  mounted. 

10.4.3  Separate  Coolers 

10.4.3.1  Forced  oil  cooled  transformers  —  in  the  case  of  forced  oil 
cooled  transformers,  oil  pumps  are  provided  for  circulating  the  oil.  The 
pumps  are  despatched  separately  after  blanking  both  suction  and  delivery 
sides.  The  pump  is  connected  at  the  proper  position  as  per  the  general 
arrangement  drawing.  New  gaskets  should  be  used  at  the  joints  and  the 
bolts  tightened.  The  pipework  at  the  pump  connection  is  done  as  per 
the  matching  marks  on  the  flanges  to  avoid  undue  stress  on  the  flanges 
of  the  pump  when  the  bolts  are*  tightened.  In  some  pumps  an  air  release 
plug  is  provided  on  the  body.    This  plug  should  be  checked  for  tightness. 

Oil  flow  meters  are  provided  on  the  pipe  line  connecting  the  pump. 
The  flow  meter  being  a  delicate  instrument  is  packed  separately  and  sent. 
The  flow  meter  should  be  taken  out  carefully  and  mounted  on  the  flange 
provided  on  the  pipe  connection.  The  mounting  position  should  be  as  per 
the  outline  general  arrangement  drawing. 

In  large  transformers  the  radiators  are  sometimes  separately  mounted. 
In  such  cases  there  will  be  a  header  each  at  top  and  bottom  which  are 

35 


IS  :  10028  ( Part  II)- 1981 

supported  on  frames.  Flanges  are  provided  on  these  headers  for  fixing 
the  radiators.  Radiator  valves  are  fitted  to  the  headers  and  despatched. 
The  end  frames  are  to  be  erected  first.  The  frames  should  be  positioned 
correctly  with  respect  to  the  transformer.  The  distances  between  centre 
lines  of  transformer  and  cooler  should  be  strictly  as  per^  the  general 
arrangement  drawing  as  otherwise  the  connecting  pipework  will  not  match. 
After  erecting  the  end  frames  the  top  and  bottom  headers  are  mounted. 
The  headers  will  have  to  be  properly  levelled  so  that  the  connecting 
pipework  can  be  easily  fixed.    Then  radiators  are  fixed. 

If  the  conservator  is  to  be  provided  on  the  cooler  the  same  may  be 
mounted  on  it  and  all  fittings  for  the  same  attached. 

The  interconnecting  pipework  may  be  done  taking  care  to  connect 
correct  pieces  at  the  correct  location.  Usually  expansion  joints  are 
provided  in  the  pipe  line  connecting  the  transformer  tank  to  the  cooler. 
Special  care  should  be  taken  to  see  that  this  is  installed  correctly. 

10.4.3.2  Forced  water  cooled  transformers  —  In  the  case  of  forced 
water  cooled  transformers  the  oil  to  water  shell  tube  heat  exchangers  are 
despatched  separately  and  properly  blanked.  On  receipt  at  site,  it  shall  be 
checked  whether  blanking  is  all  right  If  the  blanking  is  found  to  be  defec- 
tive, the  matter  has  to  be  referred  to  the  manufacturer.  In  such  a  case, 
moisture/rain  water  might  have  entered  the  heat  exchanger  oil  circuit  and 
there  might  be  rusting.  It  may  be  necessary  to  take  out  the  different 
parts  of  heat  exchangers  separately  and  clean  them  thoroughly  and  put  them 
back. 

The  brackets  for  mounting  the  heat  exchanger  may  be  attached  to 
the  transformer  first  taking  care  of  the  matching  marks.  The  heat  exchanger 
may  then  be  mounted  on  the  support  in  the  correct  position  after  referring 
to  the  general  arraagement  drawing. 

The  oil  pump,  oil  flow  meter  and  the  connecting  pipes  may  be  fixed 
after  this,  in  the  correct  position.  In  the  water  circuit  the  necessary  water 
pipes  may  be  connected.  It  is  also  to  be  made  sure  that  on  the  outlet  side 
water  is  allowed  to  discharge  freely  without  any  obstructions.  Usually  a 
water  flow  meter  is  placed  on  the  outlet  pine  to  indicate  that  there  is  a 
positive  water  flow.  It  is  to  be  made  sure  that  there  is  no  restriction  in 
the  water  outlet  pipe  as  any  obstruction  in  this  pipe  will  increase  the  pres- 
sure in  the  water  circuit  and  may  result  in  the  water  pressure  exceeding 
the  oil  pressure  and  creating  leakage  of  water  into  oil  circuit  which  is 
detrimental  to  the  transformer. 

The  heat  exchanger  oil  circuit  is  sealed  from  the  water  circuit  with 
special  seals  and  the  circuit  is  pressure  tested  at  the  supplier's  work  to 
make  it  absolutely  sure  that  there  is  no  leakage.  The  sealing  should  not 
be  tempered  with  in  any  manner  as  it  is  detrimental  to  the  transformer.    If 

36 


IS:  10028  (Part  II) -1981 

there  is  any  doubt  about  this  sealing,  the  matter  should  be  intimated  to 
the  manufacturer. 

10.5  Conservator 

10.5.0  All  transformers  of  ratings  of  50  kVA  and  above  are  normally 
provided  with  conservator  tanks  and  dehydrating  breathing  devices,  hermeti- 
cally sealed  or  nitrogen  filled  tanks  or  other  equally  suitable  means,  to 
prevent  ingress  of  moisture  into  transformer  tanks. 

10.5.1  Conservator,  where  fitted,  should  be  assembled  with  its  pipework, 
etc,  making  sure  that  all  gasketed  joints  are  oil-tight  and  the  pipework  is 
clean  and  free  from  moisture.  The  mechanism  of  the  float  type  oil  gauge 
inside  the  conservator  might  be  locked  to  prevent  damage  during  transit. 
After  placing  the  conservator  in  position,  it  should  be  released  by  turning 
the  locking  belt  in  the  direction  indicated  on  the  plate. 

10.5.2  While  topping  up  oil  in  the  transformer,  it  should  be  ensured  that 
oil  is  filled  to  a  level  indicated  by  the  oil  gauge  on  the  conservator 
commensurate  with  the  filling  oil  temperature. 

10.6  Buchholtz  Relay 

10.6.1  The  Buchholtz  is  checked  for  correct  functioning  of  the  mercury 
switches  by  injecting  air  through  the  test  petcock  when  full  of  oil.  When 
mounting  on  the  pipework,  the  correct  direction  is  maintained  with  the 
help  of  arrow  provided.  The  angle  of  inclination  is  also  to  be  checked  and 
should  be  between  3°  and  7°.  The  gas  release  pipe  if  provided  is  to  be 
connected  to  the  petcock.  In  service  the  top  petcock  should  be  open  and 
the  gas  release  pipe  should  be  full  with  oil.  When  the  gas  is  to  be  collected 
through  the  gas  release  pipe,  initially  the  oil  will  flow  out  and  then  the  gas 
can  be  collected. 

Each  time  after  removal  of  trapped  gas  from  the  relay,  this  pipe 
should  be  primed  to  the  full  with  oil.  If  there  is  any  residual  air  left  in 
the  pipe,  this  would  vitiate  the  correct  analysis  of  the  accumulated  gas. 

10.7  Dehydrating  Breathers 

10.7.1  The  breather  pipework  shall  be  properly  cleaned.  The  oil  level  in 
the  oil  seal  at  the  bottom  should  be  filled  to  the  correct  level  with  transfor- 
mer oil.  Any  oil  that  might  have  overflown  should  be  wiped  off.  It  is  to 
be  ensured  that  the  breathing  bole  at  the  bottom  of  the  seal  is  not  blocked 
by  dirt,  etc.  The  silicagel  to  be  filled  into  the  breather  shall  have  blue 
colour. 

10.8  Explosion  Vent 

10.8.1  The  temporary  cover  which  is  provided  over  the  explosion  vent 
flange  on  the  tank  cover,  should  be  removed  and  the  explosion  vent  fitted 

37 


IS  :  10028  ( Part  II )  -  1981 

with  suitable  gaskets,  care  being  taken  to  ensure  that  the  top  diaphragm 
with  its  gaskets  makes  an  air-tight  joint.  As  the  top  diaphragm  is  sent 
blanked  from  works,  the  blanking  plate  shall  not  be  removed  till  the  oil 
level  inside  the  transformer  comes  above  the  tank  cover. 

10.9  Temperature  Indicators 

10.9.1  Before  installing,  the  accuracy  of  the  instrument  shall  be  checked 
by  hot  oil  or  water  bath.  The  switches  are  adjusted  to  make  contact 
at  the  desired  temperature  depending  upon  the  site  conditions,  that  is, 
ambient  temperature,  loading  conditions,  etc. 

10.9.2  The  capillary  tube  is  protected  adequately  to  withstand  all  normal 
handling.  It  should  not,  however,  be  bent  sharply  or  repeatedly  and  should 
be  supported  by  clips  to  prevent  sagging.    On  no  account  it  shall  be  cut. 

10.9.3  The  thermometer  pocket  should  be  filled  with  sufficient  transfor- 
mer oil  to  ensure  good  thermal  contact  between  the  pocket  wall  and  the 
thermometer  bulb. 

10.9.4  The  connection  of  the  winding  temperature  indicator  C.T.  is  made 
to  the  thermometer  pocket  as  per  instruction  given  on  the  Terminal  Board. 

10.10  Current  Transformers 

10.10.1  Great  care  shall  be  taken  in  handling  current  transformers. 
Current  transformers  should  be  kept  flat  at  all  times.  If  the  transformer 
is  not  handled  properly,  it  will  deform  in  shape  resulting  in  an  increase  in 
excitation  current.  All  C.T.  secondary  terminals  should  be  short  circuited 
or  loaded  before  energising  the  transformer.  This  will  prevent  excessive 
voltage  developing  across  C.T.  secondary  which  can  damage  the  C.T.  and 
be  a  hazard  if  touched.  Excessive  magnetisation  of  the  C.T.  core  in  this 
manner  may  affect  the  ratio  accuracy  also. 

11.  COMPLETION  OF  ERECTION  WORK 

11.1  Final  topping  up  is  now  done  up  to  a  level  in  conservator  commensu- 
rate with  filling  oil  temperature  with  clean  dry  oil  and  any  other  work  such 
as  wiring  of  various  alarm/trip  contacts,  fan  motors,  pump  motor  and 
other  apparatus,  earthing  of  neutral  and  tank  is  completed.  The  interposing 
valves  between  the  radiators  and  the  tank  are  opened.  Tank  surface  is 
retouched  with  paint  wherever  required  and  transformer  is  made  ready  for 
commissioning  tests. 

12.  TESTING  AND  COMMISSIONING 

12.0  Genera]  Consideration 

12.0.1  Parallel  Operation  —  For  satisfactory  operation  in  parallel,  the 
concerned   transformers   shall    have  identical    (a)    phase   displacement, 

38 


IS 1 10028  (Part II) -1981 

(b)  voltage  ratio,  and  (c)  equal  percentage  impedance  within  permissible 
tolerances.  They  shall  be  so  connected  that  their  polarity  and  phase  rota- 
tion are  identical.  Provided  the  polarities  of  the  winding  correspond, 
transformers  with  the  following  connections  operate  satisfactorily  in 
parallel.  Connections  in  Group  A  shall  not  be  paralleled  with  those  in 
Group  B. 

Group  A  —  star/star,  delta/delta,  and  delta/zig-zag. 
Group  B  —  delta/star,  star/delta,  and  star/zig-zag. 

12.0.1.1  Transformers  designed  for  parallel  operation  shall  not  be 
required  to  divide  the  load  within  limits  closer  than  to  permit  an  individual 
variation  from  the  rated  output  of  any  transformer  of  the  group  amounting 
to  ±  10  percent  of  such  rated  output  when  the  total  load  on  the  group  is 
equal  to  the  sum  of  the  rated  outputs  of  ail  the  transformers  so  connected. 
In  addition,  the  rated  outputs  of  the  smallest  transformer  in  the  group 
should  be  not  less  than  33  percent  of  the  rated  output  of  the  largest 
transformer  in  the  group. 

12.0.2  Polarity  and  Phasing  Out  —  When  connecting  a  new  transformer 
special  care  should  be  taken  to  do  so  in  accordance  with  the  diagram  of 
connections  supplied  by  the  manufacturer  taking  into  account,  at  the  same 
time,  the  phase  sequence  of  the  supply.  In  case  of  three-phase  transformers, 
if  connections  are  not  made  in  the  correct  phase  sequence,  the  outgoing 
supply  may  also  be  of  wrong  phase  sequence.  This  would  necessitate  breaking 
down  of  connections  and  remaking  the  high  voltage  cable  connections. 

For  conventions  regarding  phase  sequences  see  IS  :  375-1963*. 

12.0.2.1  It  is  immaterial  whether  the  phase  rotation  is  clokwise  or  anti- 
clockwise so  long  as  it  is  the  same  for  all  the  transformers  that  have  to 
work  in  parallel.  However,  it  is  recommended  that  the  standard  phase 
sequences  in  accordance  with  the  Indian  and  International  practice,  namely, 
red,  yellow  and  blue  sequences  in  the  anti-clockwise  direction,  should  be 
adopted.  A  positive  check  will  help  in  ensuring  correct  external  corrections. 
The  simplest  way  is  to  connect  two  transformers  in  parallel  on  primary 
sides:  connect  the  secondary  terminals  of  one  transformer  to  its  bus-bars, 
and  connect  one  terminal  of  the  second  transformer  to  the  bus-bars,  which, 
it  is  assumed,  corresponds  to  the  equivalent  terminal  of  the  first  transfor- 
mer. After  ensuring  that  both  transformers  are  on  the  same  tap,  voltage 
readings  between  the  remaining  secondary  terminals  of  the  two  transformers 
and  the  bus-bars  be  taken.  If  both  readings  are  zero,  the  transformers  are 
of  the  same  polarity  and  phase  rotation  and  the  connections  may  be  made 
permanent. 

♦Marking  and  arrangements  for  switchgear  bus-bars,  main  connections  and  anxiliary 
waring  (revised). 

39 


IS  :  10028  (  Part  II )  - 1981 

12.0.2.2  In  the  case  of  star  connected  secondaries,  an  alternative 
arrangement  to  the  secondary  connections  indicated  above  is  to  connect  the 
star  points  to  each  other.  ( This  connection  may  be  via  earth  in  which 
case,  of  course,  none  of  the  secondary  terminals  will  be  connected  to  the 
bus-bars  before  closing. ) 

Note  —  It  should  be  noted  that  under  the  above  circumstances  it  is  also  possible  for 
the  voltage  reading  to  be  double  of  the  secondary  voltage  which  will  be  when  the 
voltage  reading  happens  to  be  across  unlike  phases.  It  is,  therefore,  necessary  that  care 
is  taken  to  see  that  the  range  of  the  voltmeter  it  equivalent  to  the  sum  of  the  secondary 
voltages  of  the  two  transformers. 

12.1  Testing  Before  Commissioning 

12.1.1  The  tests  to  be  carried  out  at  site  before  commissioning  the 
transformer  will  depend  upon  the  voltage  and  kVA  rating  of  the  transfor- 
mer, facilities  available  at  site  and  conditions  of  contract.  Appendix  B 
gives  typical  tests  to  be  carried  out. 

APPENDIX    A 

(  Clause  7.30  ) 

TOOLS  AND  EQUIPMENT  REQUIRED  FOR  INSTALLATION  WORK 

A-0.  Given  below  is  a  general  list  of  tools  and  other  equipment  used  in  the 
erection  of  a  transformer.  The  capacity,  sizes,  etc,  of  these  will  depend  on 
the  type  and  size  of  the  transformer. 

A-l.  LIFTING  EQUIPMENT 

A-l.l  Depending  upon  the  indoor  erection  or  outdoor  erection  of  the 
transformer,  crane  of  sufficient  capacity  will  be  required.  In  the  absence 
of  crane  facility,  a  derrick  is  erected  and  work  carried  out  using  a  chain 
and  pulley  block.    Wire  rope  slings,  D-shackles,  etc,  are  also  required. 

A-2.  OIL  PURIFIER 

A-2.1  A  vacuum  oil  purifier  of  sufficient  capacity  provided  with  thermosta- 
tically controlled  heating  facility  is  required.  The  following  table  may  be 
used  as  a  guide  for  selecting  the  oil  purifier  capacity  : 

Oil  Purifier  Capacity  Quantity  of  Oil  to  be  Purified 

litre/h  litre 

2  500  up  to  20  000 

5  000  up  to  50  000 

10  000  More  than  50  000 

40 


IS:  10028  (Part  II) -1981 
A-3.  VACUUM  PUMP 

A-3.1  A  vacuum  pump  with  vacuum  hose  and  other  fittings  capable  of 
producing  a  vacuum  up  to  759  mm  mercury. 

A-4.  OIL  STORAGE  TANK 

A-4.1  One  or  more  oil  tanks  of  sufficient  capacity  to  store  the  entire 
quantity  of  the  transformer  oil  will  be  useful  for  filling  from  drums.  This 
will  reduce  the  time  of  filling. 

A-5.  PRESSURE  VACUUM  GAUGE 

A-5.1  Of  desired  accuracy  for  checking  inert  gas  pressure. 

A-7.  MISCELLANEOUS 

a)  Oil  testing  apparatus  conforming  to  IS  :  335. 

b)  2  500/1  000  V  megger. 

c)  Voltmeters,  milli-ammeter,  low  power  factor  watt  meter,  voltmeter 
0  to  500  V,  0  to  100  V  range  and  0  to  5  V  range. 

d)  Avometer. 

e)  Set  of  spanners. 

f )  Set  of  drum  opener,  crowbar,  pipes,  hammer,  etc. 

g)  Set  of  screw  drivers,   cutting   pliers,   screw  spanners    and  pipe 
wrench. 

h)  Clean  cotton  cloth  and  cotton  waste. 

j)  Electric  hand  lamp. 

k)  12  mm  venyl  hose  of  approximate  10  m  length  for  being  used  as 
an  oil  level  indicator  during  erection. 

m)  Brushes  for  painting. 

n)  PVC  wires  for  connecting  meters  during  testing. 


41 


IS:  10028  (Part  II) -1981 

APPENDIX  B 

(Clause  12.1.1  ) 
TYPICAL  TESTS  CARRIED  OUT  BEFORE  COMMISSIONING 


1)  General  inspection 


2)  Secondary  injection 

3)  Primary  injection  ( also  to 
be  repeated  at  the  end  of 
alt  other  commissioning 
tests) 


4)   Ratio  tests 


a)  Control  and  relay  panels,  etc. 

b)  Junction  boxes  and  marshalling  kiosks. 

On  all  transformer  protection  relays 

a)  Tests  on    operation    and  stability    of 
earthfault  relays  on  high  voltage  side. 


b)  Tests  on    line  directional   elements  of 

high-voltage  line  relays. 

c)  Tests  on  high  speed  neutral  ammeter. 

d)  Tests  on  overcurrent  relays  on  low- 
voltage  side. 

e)  Tests  on  operation  and  stability  of 
earthfault  relays  on  low-voltage  side. 

f)  Tests  on  operation  of  standby  earthfault 
relay  on  low- voltage  side. 

g)  Tests  on  overcurrent  relay  on  high- 
voltage  side  ( when  current  transformers 
are  not  in  transformer  bushings ). 

h)  Voltage  compensation. 

a)  With  415  V  applied  on  high- voltage  side, 
measure  the  voltage  between  all  phases 
on  the  low-voltage  side  for  every  tap 
position. 

b)  To  check  phasing,  measure  volts  : 

A  to  a,  b  and  c 

B  to  a,  b  and  c 

C  to  a,  b  and  c 
where  A,  B  and  C  are  the  terminals  of 
three  phases    on  high-voltage  side  and 
a,  b  and  c  are  the  corresponding  termi- 
nals on  low-voltage  side. 

c)  Magnetic  balance  test. 


42 


IS  :  10028 (Part  II)- 1981 


5)  Tripping  tests 


6)  Calibrate  earthing 
resistance 

7)  Buchholtz  relays 


8)  Alarm  circuits 


9)  Fans  and  pumps 


a)  High  voltage. 

b)  Low  voltage. 

c)  Intertripping  tests. 

d)  Winding  temperature  trips. 


a)  Tests  for  angle,  air  injection,  etc. 

b)  Check  that  there  is  no  air  in  protector 
before  commissioning. 

c)  When  energising  transformer,  close  in 
on  'Trip',  etc. 

d)  Check  for  stability  when  oil  pumps  are 
started  : 

1)  at  ambient  temperature, 

2)  at  a  winding  temperature  of  80°C  or 
above. 

a)  Buchholtz  relay 

b)  Oil  and  winding  temperature   thermo- 
meter. 

c)  Cooling  gear  failure. 

a)  Check  that  the  oil  valves  are  open  in 
cooling  circuit. 

b)  Check  the  rotation  of  pumps,  automatic 
starting  overload  devices,  etc. 

c)  Check     stability    of    Buchholtz   relay 
[  see  7  (  d  )  above  ]. 


10)  Tap  changing  tests  to 
check  mechanism,  indi- 
cation, buzzer,  lamp,  etc 

1 1 )  Phasing  tests 


a)  At  415  V  [  see  4  (  b )  above  ]. 

b)  Between  transformers  in  a  bank. 

c)  To  prove  internal  and  external  connec- 
tion for  parallel  operation. 

d)  On     auxiliary     supplies     and    voltage 
transformers. 


43 


IS:  10028  (Part  II) -1981 

12)  Insulation  tests 


13)  Site  test  for  oil 


14)  Voltage  compensation 
test  ( if  compensating 
current  transformers  are 
fitted ) 


a)  On  high  and  low  voltage  windings. 

b)  On  current  and  voltage  transformers, 
circuits,  etc. 

a)  check  oil  level. 

b)  dielectric  test. 

c)  volume  resistivity. 

d)  acidity,  and 

e)  tan  delta 

f )  water  content. 

a)  Primary  injection  [  see  3  (  h )  above  ]. 

b)  Load  tests  [  see  20  (  g  )  below  ]. 

c)  If  necessary,  switch  in  with  relays  con- 
nected to  correctly  compensated  voltages 
from  the  other  transformer. 


15)  See  that  neutral  earthing 
switches  are  closed 
before  making  alive 

16)  Check  transformers  on 
equal  taps  before  switch- 
ing in 

17)  Set  down  relays  before 
closing  in — advise  control 

18)  If  necessary,  arrange 
temporary  protection  for 
soaking  and  switching  in, 
for  example  unrestricted 
earthfault,  if  soaking 
from  low  voltage  side 
with  113  V  and  213  V 
open. 

19)  Set  up  relays  after 
soaking  and  before  going 
on  load — advise  control. 

20)  Load  tests 


a)  For  transformers  in  a  bank. 

b)  For  transformers  in  parallel. 


a)  Voltmeter,  ammeters,  etc,  on  both  high 
and  low  voltage  sides. 

b)  Overcurrent. 

c)  No  spill  in  high  voltage  starpoint. 

d)  No  creeping  of  contacts  on   both  high 
and  low  voltage  earthfault  relays. 


44 


21)  Tap  changing  test  on  load 
over  full  range  of  taps 

22)  Advise  control  of  any  new 
equipment  commissioned 

23)  If  possible  for  transfor- 
mers rated  above  1  000 
kVA,  when  being  ener- 
gised for  the  first  time, 
the  voltage  should  be 
built  up  gradually 

24)  Low  voltage  excitation 
current 


IS  :  10028  ( Part  H)- 1981 

e)  Voltages  on  relays. 

f)  Directional  elements  —  low  voltage, 
directional  overcurrent  and  the  earth- 
fault  relays  (if  fitted). 

g)  Voltage  compensation. 


25) 


Single-phase, 
balance  test 


magnetic 


45 


IS:  10028  (Part  II) -1981 

(  Continued  from  page  2  ) 

Panel  for  Selection,  Installation  and  Maintenance  of 
Transformers,  ETDC  20/P24 

Convener  Representing 

Shri  G.  R.  Varier  Crompton  Greaves  Ltd,  Bombay 

Members 

Shri  S.  V.  Manerikar  (  Alternate  to 
Shri  C.  R.  Varier  ) 

Shri  M.  M.  Bandre  Maharashtra  State  Electricity  Board,  Bombay 

Chief  Engineer  (  Elec  )-I  Central  Public  Works  Department,  New  Delhi 

Shri  A.  Mazumdar  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  T.  K.  Ghose  Calcutta  Electric  Supply  Corporation  Ltd,  Calcutta 

Shri  G.  Chatterjee  (  Alternate ) 

Shri  M.  M.  Joag  Voltas  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  T.  Omkumar  NGEF  Limited,  Bangalore 

Shri  K.  V.  Javadev  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  N.  R.  Santhanam  Tata  Consulting  Engineers,  Bombay 

Shri  M.  N.  Bapat  (  Alternate ) 

Shri  P.  S.  Sawhney  Delhi  Electric  Supply  Undertaking,  New  Delhi 

Shri  P.  D.  Sharma  (  Alternate) 
Senior  Manager  Dev  (E)  Bharat  Heavy  Electrical*  Ltd,  Secunderabad 

Shri  D.  P.  Gupta  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  I.  N.  Thukral  Haryana  State  Electricity  Board,  Chandigarh 

Shri  J.  L.  Arora  (  Alternate) 


46 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  NEW  DELHI  1 10002 

Telephones:  323  0131,  323  3375,  323  9402 

Fax :  91  1 1  3234062,  91  1 1  3239399,  91  1 1  3239382 

Telegrams  :  Manaksanstha 

(Common  to  all  Offices) 

Central  Laboratory:  Telephone 

Plot  No.  20/9,  Site  IV,  Sahibabad  Industrial  Area,  Sahibabad  201010  8-77  0032 

Regional  Offices: 

Central :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  NEW  DELHI  1 1 0002  323  76  1 7 

'Eastern  :  1/14  CIT  Scheme  VII  M,  V.I. P.  Road,  Mantktola,  CALCUTTA  700054  337  86  62 

Northern  :  SCO  335-336,  Sector  34-A,  CHANDIGARH  160022  60  38  43 

Southern  :  C.I.T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  CHENNAl  600113  235  23  15 

t  Western  :  Manakalaya,  E9,  Behind  Marol  Telephone  Exchange,  Andheri  (East),  832  92  95 
MUMBAI  400093 

Branch  Offices: 

'Pushpak',  Nurmohamed  Shaikh  Marg,  Khanpur,  AHMEDABAD  380001  550  13  48 

iPeenya  Industrial  Area,  1st  Stage,  Bangalore-Tumkur  Road,  839  49  55 
BANGALORE  560058 

Gangotri  Complex,  5th  Floor,  Bhadbhada  Road,  T.T.  Nagar,  BHOPAL  462003  55  40  21 

Plot  No.  62-63,  Unit  VI,  Ganga  Nagar,  BHUBANESHWAR  751001  40  36  27 

Kalaikathir  Buildings,  670  Avinashi  Road,  COIMBATORE  641037  21  01  41 

Plot  No.  43,  Sector  16  A,  Mathura  Road,  FARIDABAD  121001  8-28  88  01 

Savitri  Complex,  1 1 6  G.T.  Road,  GHAZIABAD  201 001  8-71  1 9  96 

53/5  Ward  No.  29,  R.G.  Barua  Road,  5th  By-lane,  GUWAHATI  781003  54  1 1  37 

5-8-56C,  L.N.  Gupta  Marg,  Nampally  Station  Road,  HYDERABAD  500001  20  10  83 

E-52,  Chitaranjan  Marg,  C-Scheme,  JAIPUR  302001  37  29  25 

117/418  B,  Sarvodaya  Nagar,  KANPUR  208005  21  68  76 

Seth  Bhawan,  2nd  Floor,  Behind  Leela  Cinema,  Naval  Kishore  Road,  23  89  23 

LUCKNOW  226001 

NIT  Building,  Second  Floor,  Gokulpat  Market,  NAGPUR  440010  52  51  71 

Patliputra  Industrial  Estate,  PATNA  800013  26  23  05 

Institution  of  Engineers  (India)  Building  1332  Shivaji  Nagar,  PUNE  41 1005  32  36  35 

TO  No.  14/1421,  University  P.O.  Palayam,  THIRUVANANTHAPU'RAM  695034  6  21  17 


"Sales  Office  is  at  5  Chowringhee  Approach,  P.O.  Princep  Street,  27  10  85 

CALCUTTA  700072 

t Sales  Office  is  at  Novelty  Chambers,  Grant  Road,  MUMBAI  400007  309  65  28 

$  Sales  Office  is  at  'F'  Block,  Unity  Building,  Narashimaraja  Square,  222  39  71 

BANGALORE  560002 


Printed  at  Simco  Printing  Press,  Delhi 


