*******••*•**••• 



ir te^ 



-k 



W^ i^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
^Step Out From the Old to the New' 



i55K| V H?!!5?5i$?S5^N5ft^^ 



IS 10032 (1981) : Organic no bake binders for use in 
foundries [MTD 14: Foundry] 



fi ^ lllti^^ S ^t^:^! ilV ^ <>^^: 



i5?as\ u i>K^5c^>s«e^^ 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen'' 





BLANK PAGE 



^*y»^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 10432- 1981 

(Reaffirmed 2003) 



Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
ORGANIC NO BAKE BINDERS FOR USE 

IN FOUNDRIES 



UDC 62r742'4S7 




© Capyright 1982 



INDIAJS STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK PITA VAN' g llAHADUR 3HAH ZA^AR MARCS 

^^g^^ Gr 3tFW OKLHt \mm 
JPPSi^^ Febru^rj I9&2 



IS : 10032 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

ORGANIC NO BAKE BINDERS FOR USE 

IN FOUNDRIES 

Poundry Sectional Committee, SMDC 17 

Chairman Representing 

Dk S. S. Khanna National Institute of Foundry & Forge Techno- 

logy, Ranchi 

Members 
Shbj a. K. Awasthi Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Bokaro Stec! 

Plant), Bokaro 
Senior Chemist & Metai^lukgist, Ministry of Railways 
GLW, Chittaranjan 

Chemist & Metallttrgis'i' 

CLW, Chittaranjan ( Alternate I ) 
Chemist & Metallurgist 
N. F, Rly, New Bonoaigaon 
( Alternate II ) 
Shri K. a. Ganbhi HMT Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri Sajj jit Sen ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. K. Goswami Indian Non-Ferrous Metals Manufacturers* 

Association, Calcutta 
Shri D. P. Jain ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. K. Gugneja DCM Engineering Products, Delhi Cloth & 

General Mills, New Delhi 
Dr V. P. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. L. Jain National Institute of Foundry & Forge 

Technology, Ranchi 
Shri K. Kishobe {Alternate) 
Shri R. K. Kejriwal Federation of Engineering Industries of India, 

New Delhi 
Shri V. N. Upadhaya ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. C. Kothabi Pioneer Equipment Co Pvt Ltd, Vadodara 

Shri C. Bhaskaran {Alternate) 
Shri K. S. Lal The Indian Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri R. N. Mukherjbe ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on pa?e 2 ) 



© Copyright 1982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10032 - 1981 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri K. N. Mehra Heavy Engineering Corporation Ltd, Foundry 

Forge Plant, Ranchi 
Shri A. K. Banerjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. R. Mohan Rao Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri U. Sen ( Alternate ) 
Shbi N. V. Pandit M. M. Suri & Associates ( P ) Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri M. K. Pramanik Iron & Steel Control ( Ministry of Steel & 

Mines), Calcutta 
ShriG. N.Rao National Metallurgical Laboratory (CSIR), 

Jamshedpur 
Shbi P. P. Rastogi Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Rourkela Steel 

Plant), Rourkela 
Shri D. SiNQH ( ^/f^rnaitf) 
Shri R. N. Saha Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals 

( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi 
Shri Darbara Sinoh ( Alternate) 
Shri B, L. Sen Indian Oxygen Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri V. P. Shenoy Tata Engineering & Locomotiye Go Ltd, 

Jamshedpur 
SHfii A. Bhatxacharjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. N. Sundbrajan M. N. Dastur & Go Pvt Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri S. ThiyaoaraJaN Southern Alloy Foundries Pvt Ltd, Madras 

Shri T. S. Venkoha Rao Ennore Foundries Ltd, Madras 

Shri K. V. Krishnan {Alternate ) 
Shri G. R. Rama Rao, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Struc & Met ) 

Secretary 

Shbi S. K. Gupta 
Assistant Director ( Metals ), ISI 



Foundry Binders Subcommittee, SMDC 17:4 

Convener 
Dr V. P. Gupta DCM Engineering Products, Ropar 

Members 
Chemist & Mbtalluboist ( SF ) Ministry of Railways 
GLW, Ghittaranj an 
Chemist & M etalt^ubgist 

N.F. Rly, New Bongaigaon {Alternate) 
Shbi K. A. Gandhi HMT Ltd, Bangalore 

Shbi Sanjit Sen ( Alternate ) 
Db R. H. Khan National Institute of Foundry & Forge Techno- 

logy, Ranchi 
Db K. S. S. Mubth y Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 

( Continued on page 10 ) 



IS : 10032 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

ORGANIC NO BAKE BINDERS FOR USE 

IN FOUNDRIES 

0- FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 30 December 1981, after the draft finalized by the Foundry Sectional 
Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division 
Council. 

0.2 Moulds and cores with high degree of dimensional accuracy are 
commonly made by using ^ No Bake Binder ' mixed with sand. 
Increased productivity and excellent breakdown properties are considered 
to be additional advantages. 

0.2.1 The binder is a proprietory resin of one of the following types: 

a) Phenol base, 

b) Urea furan base, and 

c) Alkyd base { with or without accelerator^). 

0.2. 1.1 The hardener is an acid for a, b and isocyanate for c. 

0,2.2 The hardening is effected by a chemical reaction between the 
binder and the catalyst without any external heat. 

0.3 Proper choice of the system is necessary for successful production of 
different types of castings, such as steel, cast iron and non-ferrous. 

0.3.1 Type (b) are not suitable for steel castings whereas most of the 
ferrous and non-ferrous castings may be produced from (a), (b) and (c) 
types of resins. 

0.3.2 On curing, the phenolic system turns to pink, the furan system 
turns to green and the alkyd system does not change from the original 
colour of the sand, 

0,3.3 Basically phenolic system is toxic in nature. A proper guidance 
for safe handling shall be provided by the manufacturer* 

3 



IS : 10032 - 1981 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the reqirements for organic no bake binders for 
use in foundries. 

2. SUPPLY OF MATERIAL 

2.1 General requirements relating to the supply of organic no bake 
binders shall be as specified in IS : 1387-1967|. 

3. REQUIREMENTS 

3.1 Viscosity of the binder when tested by Ford Gup Viscometer No. 4 
( see. IS : 101-1964{ ) shall not be more than 250 seconds at 30°C. 

3.2 Within the stipulated storage life, the binder shall not form a separated 
layer at the top. 

4. PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF STANDARD SAND MIX 

4.1 The physical properties of sand, binder and hardener mix, when tested 
according to the procedure specified in Appendix A shall be as given in 
Table 1 for the different types of binder system. 

5. SAMPLING 

5.1 Sampling procedure and the criteria for conformity shall be as given 
in Appendix B. 

6. STORAGE QUALITY 

6.1 The user shall store the materials as stipulated by the manufacturer. 
The period for which a * no bake ' binder system may be stored without 
deterioration shall be indicated on the containers by the manufacturer. 
Within the shelf-life period, if the material does not meet the requirements 
given in 3 and 4 shall be declared as not complying with the standard, 
even though the lot might have been accepted after testing on its arrival. 



*RuIrs for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 

tGeneral requirements for the supply of metallurgical materials [first revision). 

fMethods of test for ready mixed paints and enamels {second revision ), 



TABLE I REQUIREMENTS OF PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF STANDARD SAND MIX 

( Clause 4.1 ) 



Resin Typk/Physicai. 
Properties 

(ij 

Time in minutes to attain 
compression strength of 
0-010 MPa on 50 mm x 
50 mm test piece 

Time in minutes to attain^ 

0'207 MPa by mould 

strength tester on 

200 mm X 250 mm test piece 

or 

Time in miniit<^s to attain 
compression strength of 
1-034 MPa on 50 mm x 
50 mm test piece 

Sirength by mould strength 
tester on the sides just 
after stripping 

Deformation after stripping 



Phenolic 


Uri:a Furan 


Oil Alkyp 


Test to Detekmin 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5 


15, Min 


30, Min 


25, Min 


Bench life /Working 
time 



Compression strength after 
240 minutes 

Gas content ml/g 

Note— 1 MPa = 1 N/mra* 



90, Max 



Shall not be less 
than 017 MPa 



The cere shall not 
sag or deform 

1-72 MPa, Min 



16 -20 



150, Max 



Shall not be less 
than 017 MPa 



The core shall not 
sag or deform 

1-03 MPa, Min 



16- 20 



120, Max 



Stripping time 



Shall not be less Thorough hardening 
than 0M7 MPa 



The core shall not Thorough hardening 
sag or deform 



1-38 MPa, Min 
18- 22 



Strength 



1 MN/m2 = 0-102 kgf/mm^ 



C/3 



IS : 10032 - 1981 

7. PACKING 

7.1 The material shall be packed in a suitable container with which the 
material shall not react. 

8. MARKING 

8,1 The containers shall be legibly marked with the name and type o£ the 
material, quantity, manufacturer's name, production batch number, date 
of manufacturing and date of expiry. 

8,1.1 The material may also be marked with the ISI Certification 
Mark. 

NoTK — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of 
the Indian Standards Institution (Certification Marks) Act and the Rules and 
Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the 
requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing 
and quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the 
producer. ISI marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity 
to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a 
licence for the use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers 
or processors, may bft obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 



APPENDIX A 

( Clause 4.1 ) 

METHODS OF TEST FOR ORGANIC NO BAKE BINDERS 

A-1. RAW MATERIALS REQUIRED 

A-1.1 Sand — Silica sand as specified in IS : 3018-1977* shall be used. 

A-1.2 Resin — The binder under test. 

A-1. 3 Catalyst — Specified catalyst for the binder under test. 

A-2. APPARATUS 

A-2.1 A paddle type sand mixer of 20 kg capacity shall be used. 

A-2.2 Standard sand testing equipments for physical testing of sand. 

A-2.3 Mould strength tester {see Fig. 1) 

A-2.4 Wooden core box 200 mm dia x 250 mm height. 

A-2.5 Gas determinator. 



•Specification for standard silica land for raw material testing in foundries. 

6 



IS : 10032 - 1981 




Fig. 1 Mould Strength Tester 
A-3. COMPOSITION OF STANDARD MIX 



A-3.1 Sand 
Binder 
Catalyst 



15 kg 

2"0 percent of sand 

20 percent of binder 



A-3.2 In case the alkyd base binder (without accelerator) is availablcj a 
separate addition of 5 percent accelerator, based on binder shall be added 
after premixing with the binder alone. 

A-3.2.1 For alkyd base binders (with accelerator) the standard mix as 
given in A-3.1 shall be used. 

A-4. MIXING PROCEDURE 

A-4.1 Weighed quantity of sand shall be charged in the dry and clean 
mixer. Weighed quantity of catalyst shall be added uniformly on the 
sand bed while the mixture is on. Sand and the catalyst together shall be 
mixed for two minutes. Then the binder shall be added as before and 
mixed for three minutes and discharged into a clean bucket. 

A-5. TESTING PROCEDURE 

A-5.1 Test for Bench Life — Eight numbers of 50x50 mm 
standard sand sample shall be prepared very quickly from the mix, using 



IS: 10032 -1981 

split specimen tube and tested at an interval of 5 minutes for compression 
strength. The stripping of the sand specimen shall be done just prior to 
testing. 0*010 MPa green strength indicates the end of bench life. 

A-5,2 Development of Strength on Core — Immediately after the 
discharge of sand from the mixer the core box as specified in A-2.4 has 
to be filled up. During filling, gentle tapping of the sides are necessary 
to have uniform packing. The top surface of the core shall be levelled 
off by a metal strip. 5 numbers of vent holes of 6 to 8 mm dia (uniformly 
spaced) shall be pierced on the top surface. The holes shall be up to about 
25 mm above the bottom of the core. At an interval of every thirty 
minutes after filling the box, strength is required to be tested on the top 
surface by mould strength tester and recorded. The time to attain 
0-207 MPa indicates the stripping time. The core box shall then be 
opened to observe strength at the side 25 mm from top and bottom and 
at the middle of the core. The core shall also be examined for sagging 
tendency by l)ulging of the sides or collapse. 

A-5.3 Other tests shall be carried out as per standard testing procedure 
adopted in foundry sand testing {see IS : 1918-1966*) 



APPENDIX B 

( Clause 5 A ) 

SAMPLING AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 
B-1. LOT 

B-1,1 In any consignment, all the containers containing material of the 
same quality and manufactured under similar conditions of manufacture 
shall be grouped together to constitute a lot. 

B-l.l.l Samples shall be taken and tested from each lot for 
ascertaining the conformity. 

B-2. SCALE OF SAMPLING 

B-2.1 The number of containers, to be selected, shall be according to 
col (1) and (2) of Table 2, 

B-2.1. 1 The containers shall be selected at random. For this purpose, 
the provisions given in IS : 4905-1968t shall be used. 



♦Methods of physical tests for foundry sands. 
fMethods for random sampling. 



8 



IS : 10032 - 1981 



TABLE 2 SCALE OF SAMPLING 

(Clause B'2.1 ) 

No OF Containers to No. of Containers 

BE IN THE Lot to be Selected 

JV n 

(1) (2) 

Up to 100 5 

101 to 300 8 

301 ,, 500 13 

501 and above 20 

B-3. PREPARATION OF TEST SAMPLES 

B-3.1 From each of the selected containers, as per col (1) and (2) of 
Table 2 with the help of a suitable sampling instrument 0*5 kg material 
shall be taken. This material shall be taken from the top, centre and 
bottom of each selected containers. Samples taken from each container 
shall be mixed to form a composite sample of 2'5 kg. By coning and 
quartering division method the 2'5 kg shall be reduced to give a final 
test sample of 300 g. The sample, thus obtained shall be divided into 
three equal portions, one for the purchaser, the second for the 
manufacturer and the third shall be kept as a referee sample. 

B-4. NUMBER OF TESTS AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 

B-4.1 The sample prepared as per B-3.1 shall be used to test for 
chemical, size, hardness and microstructure characteristics. 

B-4*2 If the sample fails to meet any one of the relevant requirements 
(see B-4.1) two further samples shall be taken and tested for requirement 
for which the sample has failed. If the material tested conforms to the 
relevant requirement while retesting two samples, the lot shall be declared 
as conforming to the specification otherwise not. 



IS : 10032 - 1981 

( Continued from page 2 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri N. V. Raja Rao Tata Engineering & Locomotive Go Ltd, 

Jamshedpur 

Shri A. Bhattacharjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. Ranganathan Indian Vegetable Products Ltd, Bombay 

Shri M. T. Jetly ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. C. Rastogi Heavy Engineering Corporation Ltd, Ranchi 

Shri M. Mohan ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. S, Shah Premier Automobiles Ltd, Bombay 

Shri D. Sitaramaiah Greaves Foseco Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. Seetharaman ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. S. Venkoba Rao Ennore Foundries Ltd, Madras 

Shri K, Chinnathanbi ( Alternate ) 



10 



