**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10018 (1981) : Lacquer, cellulose, nitrate, clear, 
finishing, glossy for wood [CHD 20: Paints, Varnishes and 
Related Products] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

LACQUER, CELLULOSE NITRATE, CLEAR, 

FINISHING, GLOSSY FOR WOOD 



UDG 667-633-26 : [67a-544-2 3 : 667 636-42 




© Copyright I9ft2 

INDIAN STAMDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAX JiHAVAM. ft BAIiADUR SHAll ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI IIQOO^ 

Pike lb 6 W -^t^S^i 1982 



IS : 10018 ■ 1981 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

LACQUER, CELLULOSE NITRATE, CLEAR, 

FINISHING, GLOSSY FOR WOOD 

Paints and Allied Products Sectional Committee, CDC 8 

Chairman Representing 

Shri K. N. R. Sharma Directorate General of Technical Development, 



New Delhi 



Members 



Shri R. D. Kawatra ( Alternate to 
Shri K. N. R. Sharma ) 
Shri Baljit Singh Bhagsons Paint Industries ( India ), New Delhi 

Shri Hardip Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. M. Banerjee National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri V. M. Bavdekar Asian Paints ( India ) Ltd, Bombay 

Dr p. K. Bhandari Shalimar Paints Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri S. Bhattacharyya Alkali & Chemical Corporation of India Ltd, Rishra 

(WB) 

Shri G. N. Tiwari ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. S. Birdie Shri Ram Test Houscj Delhi 

Shri C. P, Sharda ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Bose Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals 

(Inspection Wing), New Delhi 

Shri D. S. Ghowdhury ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. Chandra Oil Technologists' Association of India, Kanpur 

Shri M. S. Saxena ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. S. Dhingra All India Small Scale Paint and Allied Industries 

Association, Bombay 
Director ( EIG ) Export Inspection Council of India, Calcutta 

Shri M. M. Ghosh Indian Paint Association, Calcutta 

Shri T. K. S. Mani Addisons Paints and Chemicals Ltd, Madras 

Shri M. B. Satyanarayana ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. Mulloth Goodlass Nerolac Paints Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. S. Ankaikar ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. Phiup Indian Aluminium Company Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri P, N. Phadke ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. S. Rajeevalochanam Heavy Machine Building Plant, Heavy Engineering 

Co Ltd, Ranchi 

Shri D. P, Mukherjee ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10018 - 1981 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri D. Ramamurthy Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri N. D. Gupta ( Alternate I ) 

Shri R. C. Misra ( Alternate II ) 
Dr R.J. Rathi Sudarshan Chemical Industries Ltd^ Pune 

Shri K. L. Rathi ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. Satyanarayana Development Commissioner ( Small Scale Industries), 

New Delhi 

Dr S. K. Kapoor ( Alternate ) 
Scientific Adviser to The Chief Naval Headquarters ( Ministry of Defence ) 

OF The Naval Staff 
Dr a. K. Sen Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri S. K. Asthana ( Alternate ) 
Senior Chemist and Metallurgist Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) 

Assistant Research Officer ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. R. Sequera Garware Paints Ltd, Bombay 

Dr p. G. Chaudhari ( Alternate I ) 

Shri C. R. Thuse ( Alternate II ) 
Dr S. M. Singh Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), 

Roorkee 

Shri R. S. Srivastava ( Alternate ) 
Dr M. a, Sivasamban Regional Research Laboratory ( CSIR ), Hyderabad 

Dr M. M. Shirsalkar ( Alternate ) 
Capt V. Subramanian The Shipping Corporation of India Ltd, Bombay 

Capt S. K. Khurana ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. D. Tiwari Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Surveyor of Works ( Alternate ) 
Dr Hari Bhagwan, Director General, ISI { Ex-officio Member) 

Director ( Chem ) 

Secretaries 

Shri R. K. Singh 
Deputy Director ( Chem ), ISI 

Shri M. Mukhopadhyay 
Deputy Director ( Chem ), ISI 



Panel for Paints, Varnishes, Lacquers and Ancillaries for Automobile 
Industry, GDC 8:6:3 

Convener 

Shri G. Ramamurthy Tata Engineering and Locomotives Co Ltd ( Auto 

Division ) , Bombay 

Members 

Shri S. K. Jain ( Alternate to 
Shri G. Ramamurthy ) 
Shri S. Bhattagharyya Alkali and Chemical Corporation of India Ltd, 

Rishra ( WB ) 
Shri S. C. Datta ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 12 ) 



IS : 10018 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

LACQUER, CELLULOSE NITRATE, CLEAR, 

FINISHING, GLOSSY FOR WOOD 



0. FOREWORD 

0,1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 20 November 1981, after the draft finalized by the Paints and Allied 
Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical 
Division Council. 

0.2 The material intended for decoration and protection of wood and 
metal surfaces so far, was covered in IS : 349-1955*. On review this specifi- 
cation was split into two separate standards, one covering the material 
used for protection and decoration of wood, and other for material used 
for protection and decoration of metal surfaces including electroplated 
surfaces. Accordingly IS : 349-1 98 l*f has already been issued separately 
which covers the material used for metal surfaces only. 

0.3 This standard covers clauses 4.1 and 4.2.1 which call for agreement 
between the purchaser and the supplier. 

0.4 In the preparation of this standard substantial assistance has been 
derived from data supplied by M/s Addisons Paints & Chemicals Ltd, 
Madras which is thankfully acknowledged. 

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing 
the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS : 2-1960J. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes requirements and methods of sampling and 
test for lacquer, cellulose nitrate, clear, finishing, glossy for wood. 



*Specificat ion for lacquers, cellulose, clear. 

tSpecification for lacquer, cellulose nitrate, clear, finishing, glossy for metal {first revision )- 

JRules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 



IS : 10018 - 1981 

1,1.1 The material is used for protection and decoration of wooden 
articles like table tops, high grade furniture, bank counters, radio and 
TV cabinets, etc. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2*1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given under 2 of 
IS : 197-1969* shall apply. 

3. REQTUIREMENTS 

3.1 Description — The material shall be clear, transparent and free from 
foreign matter, sediment and undissolved water. 

3.2 Composition — The material shall be based on cellulose nitrate, 
plasticizers and resins, dissolved in suitable solvents with diluents in suitable 
proportions to satisfy the requirements of this standard. 

3.3 Compatibility and Thinning — The material shall be compatible 
with lacquer thinner conforming to IS : 5667-1970| and may be thinned up 
to a thinning ratio of one part of the lacquer and 1 *5 parts of the thinner 
for convenience of application. The thinned lacquer shall be clear, free 
from insoluble material and suitable for application by spraying. The 
exact thinning ratio and application viscosity may vary with individual 
manufacturers product. The thinning viscosity of 18 to 25 seconds at 30°C 
when tested as prescribed in 7.4 of IS : 101 -1964 J is suitable for spray 
application of the lacquer. 

3.4 Freedom from Benzene and Chlorinated Hydrocarbon Solvents 

— The material when tested as prescribed in Appendix A shall pass the 
test. 

3.5 Resistance to Water — The material shall conform to the test as 
prescribed in Appendix B. 

3.6 The material shall also comply with the requirements given in Table 1 . 



•Methods of sampling and test for varnishes and lacquers {first revision ). 
tSpecification for thinner for cellulose nitrate based paints and lacquers. 
JMethods of test for ready mixed paints and enamels ( second revision ). 



IS : 10018 - 1981 



TABLE 1 REQUIREMENTS FOR LACQUER, CELLULOSE NITRATE, CLEAR 
FINISHING, GLOSSY FOR WOOD 



Sl No. Characteristic 



(1) (2) 

i) Drying time and 
compatibility 
a) Surface Dry 



b) Ready for rubbing and 
polishing 

ii) Colour in 1 -in. cell on lovi- 
bond scale expressed as 
r+ 5i?, not deeper than 

iii) Consistency 



iv) Finish 

v) Scratch hardness under a 
load of 500 g 

vi) Flexibility and adhesion 
after 48 hours air-drying 

vii) Flash point, Mm, °C 

viii) Volatile matter, percent by 
mass J Max 

ix) Freedom from blushing and 

blooming 
x) Suitability for rubbing down 
xi) Selflifting 
xii) Keeping properties 



( Clauses 3.6 and 6.1 ) 
Req^uirement 



(3) 



Methods of Test, 
Ref to 

r ^ * 

Appendix CI No. in 

IS : 197-1969* 



First, second and third 
coats — 20 minutes 
with no tendency to 
lift the under-lying 
coats. 

16 hours 
16 



Smooth and uniform 
and suitable for 
spraying, after thin- 
ning as prescribed in 
3.3 



Smooth and glossy 


To 


pass 


the test 


To 


pass 

14 
70 


the test 


To 


pass 


the test 



To pass the test 

To pass the test 

Not less than one year 
from the date of 
manufacture 



(4) 



(5) 



7.2 

9t 



8 
10 

11 

( Method 1 ) 

13 



D 

E 

F 



%(i 



•Methods of sampling and test for varnishes and lacquers {first revision ). 
tMay be done on the lines of test method prescribed in 13 of IS : 548 ( Part I )-1964 
Method of sampling and tests for oils and fats: Part I Sampling, physical and chemical 

tests ( revised). 



IS : 10018 - 1981 

4. PACKING AND MARKING 

4.1 Packing — The material shall be packed in metal containers as 
agreed between the purchaser and the supplier. 

4.2 Marking — Each container shall be marked with the following 
particulars : 

a) Name and colour of the material ; 

b) Name of the manufacturer and his recognized trade-mark, if any; 

c) Volume of the material; 

d) Thinning ratio; 

e) Batch No. or lot No. in code or otherwise; and 

f) Month and year of manufacture. 

4.2.1 Other details of marking shall be as agreed between the purchaser 
and the supplier. 

4*2.2 The containers may also be marked with the ISI Certification 
Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions 
of the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules 
and Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an 
Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply 
with the requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated 
by the producer. ISI marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for 
conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under 
which a licence for the use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manu- 
facturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 

4.2.3 The material when intended for defence purposes, shall be packed 
and marked in accordance with IS : 5661-1970*. 

5. SAMPUNG 

5.1 Preparation of Test Samples 

5.1.1 Tender Sample — The supplier may dispense with sending a tender 
sample provided he declares that the material for which the tender is given 
is of same quality as the sample previously registered in his name. 

5.1.2 Bulk Supply Sample — Representative sample of the material shall 
be drawn as prescribed under 3 of IS : 197-1969t. 



*Code of practice for packing and marking of packages of paints, enamels, varnishes 
and allied products. 

fMethods of sampling and test for varnishes and lacquers [first revision). 



IS ; 10018 - 1981 
6. TEST METHODS 

6.1 The tests shall be carried out as prescribed in IS : 101-1964*, 
IS : 197-1969t and Appendices A to F. References to relevant clauses of 
IS : 197-1969t is given in col 5 of Table 1 and that of Appendices in 3-4, 
3.5 and col 4 of Table 1. Reference to relevant clauses of IS : 101-1964* is 
given in 3.3. 

6.2 Q,uality of Reagents — Unless specified otherwise, pure chemicals 
and distilled water ( see IS : I070-1977J ) shall be employed in tests. 

I^OTE — *Pure chemicals' shall mean chemicals that do not contain impurities 
which affect the results of analysis. 

APPENDIX A 

{Clause 3.4) 

TEST FOR FREEDOM FROM BENZENE AND CHLORINATED 
HYDROCARBON SOLVENTS 

A-0. GENERAL 

A-OJ Outline of the Method — The material is steam distilled and 
solvents collected. It is subjected to test for benzene and chlorinated hydro- 
carbons qualitatively. 

A-1. APPARATUS 

A-1.1 Steam Distillation Apparatus 

A-1.2 Distilling Flask— 100ml capacity. 

A-1. 3 Bunsen Burner 

A-2. REAGENTS 

A-2.1 Nitric Acid — j,?^ IS : 264-1976§. 

A-2.2 SulphuHc Acid-- w IS : 266-1977j|. 

A-2.3 Copper Wire — 0*914 to 1-219 mm in diameter. 



*Methods of" test for ready mixed paints and enamels ( second revision ). 
fMethods of sampling and test for varnishes and lacquers {first revision ). 
J Specification for water for general laboratory use ( second revision ). 
S Specification for nitric acid (second revision). 
[[Specification for sulphnrie acid {second revision). 



IS : 10018 - 1981 

A-3. PROCEDURE 

A-3.1 Steam distil 100 ml of the material using a receiver cooled in ice. 
Separate the solvent layer, wash with several times its volume of distilled 
water^ discard the washings, dry and redistil, collecting all solvents within 
the agreed specified boiling range, subject this to the tests prescribed 
in A.3.1.1 and A-3.1.2. 

A-3.1.1 Test for Benzene — Mix equal volumes of nitric acid and sulphuric 
acid in a test-tube and cool. To 2 ml of this solution add 10 drops of the 
solvent and shake. Warm, if necessary and examine for the odour of nitro- 
benzene which is given by 5 percent benzene or larger amounts of toluene. 
Boil the contents for at least 30 seconds, allow to cool and add 10 ml of 
water. Mix the contents and examine for odour of nitrobenzene, which 
should be no longer present if the contents were boiled enough. Allow the 
tube to stand for some time. A yellow cloudy solution or flocculent preci- 
pitate changing to yellow needles is evidence of the presence of benzene. 
It may further be confirmed by separating the yellow needles and finding 
out its melting point which should be 89° to 90^C. In case of dispute, gas 
chromatography may be employed to detect the presence of benzene using 
analytical grade benzene as standard. 

A-3.1.2 Test for Chlorinated Hydrocarbons — Form a small loop in the copper 
wire and heat in a small Bunsen flame until it no longer colours the flame. 
Allow the loop to cool and then dip it into the test solution. Immediately 
place in the outer part of the flame and when the first luminous flame 
disappears, examine for the green colouration due to chlorinated compounds. 

A-3*2 The material shall be deemed to have passed the test if the solution 
when tested as prescribed in A-3.1,1 does not give off smell of nitrobenzene 
or forms yellow crystals and when tested as prescribed in A-3J.2 does not 
impart a green colouration to the Bunsen flames. 



APPENDIX B 

{Clause 3.5) 

DETERMINATION OF RESISTANCE TO WATER 

B-0, GENERAL 

B-0.1 Outline of the Method — The varnish coated panel, after specified 
drying period, is immersed in distilled water for 48 hours at room temper- 
ature and examined for any signs of deterioration and change in gloss. 

8 



IS : 10018 - 1981 

B-1. PROCEDURE 

B-1.1 Apply a coat of material to a glass panel prepared as prescribed 
under 5,3 of IS : 197-1969* to give a dry film weight commensurate with 
the weight per 10 litres of the material as specified in 6.4 of IS : 197-1969*^ 
Allow the panel to air dry in a horizontal position for 48 hours. Immerse 
the panel in distilled water ( conforming to IS : 1070-1977t ) at room 
temperature for 48 hours. Remove it from water and examine after 4 hours. 

B-1.2 The film shall show no signs of deterioration and shall retain at least 
60 percent of the original gloss as determined in the glossmeter described 
under 7.7 of IS : 101 -1964 J. Loss of adhesion alone shall not be considered 
a cause of rejection. 

APPENDIX C 

[ Table 1, Item (viii)] 

DETERMINATION OF VOLATILE MATTER 

C-1. PROCEDURE 

G-1.1 Weigh accurately about 3*0 to 3*5 g of the well mixed material in a 
flat-bottomedj circular dish about 77 mm diameter. Heat the dish and the 
contents on a water bath maintained at 60° to 70°C for a period of 2 hours. 
At the end of this period, wipe the dish dry from the outside, keep in a 
desiccator»for 2 hours and weigh. 

C-2. Calculate and express the volatile matter ( loss in weight ) as percent- 
age of the mass of the material taken for the test. 

APPENDIX D 

[ Table 1, Item (ix)] 

TEST FOR BLUSHING AND BLOOMING 

D-l. PROCEDURE 

D-1.1 Spray the material at the room temperature and at a relative humi- 
dity not exceeding 70 percent on to a 150x 150 mm glass plate and allow 
it to air-dry for one hour at the room temperature in a well ventilated 
chamber free from draught and dust and examine the panel. 

D-2. The film shall show no tendency to blush or bloom. 



*Methods of sampling and test for varnishes and lacquers {first revision ] 
jSpecification for water for general laboratory use ( second revision ). 
JMethods of test for ready mixed paints and enamels ( second revision ) . 



IS : 10018 - 1981 

APPENDIX E 

[ Table \, Item (x)] 

TEST FOR SUITABILITY FOR RUBBING DOWN 
E-1. TEST PANELS 

E-1.1 The panels shall be seasoned teak wood conforming to the require- 
ments of 5,4.1 of IS : 197-1969*. Panels shall be 600 X 300 x 25 mm in size. 
The panels shall be bevelled at the edges and shall be smoothened by 
rubbing down with fine paper, the back being protected with a suitable 
paint. 

E-2. PREPARATION OF TEST PANELS 

£-2.1 In the painting procedure outlined under £-2,2 the air drying shall 
be done at the room temperature as defined under 2-3 of IS : 197-1969* 
and at a relative humidity of not more than 70 percent. 

E-2*2 The surface of the test panels to be exposed shall be prepared as 
follows : 

a) Apply by a pad, a very thin coat of varnish, finishing, exterior, 
synthetic conforming to IS : 524-1968|. Allow to dry for 6 hours, 

b) Apply one coat of liquid transparent wood filler ( conforming to 
IS : 345- 1952 J ) and TGxnovG the gkcgss after it has dried to touch, 
by rubbing across the grains with jute fibres or hessian cloth and 
allow to dry for 24 hours. 

c) For coarse grained wood, a second application of the wood filler 
is recommended after the first application, has become dry to touch. 
Then allow to dry for 24 hours. 

d) Rub down with emery paper No. 240 and wipe off dust. 

e) Apply two coats of sanding sealer after thinning one part of the 
sanding sealer with one part of lacquer thinner ( conforming to 
IS : 5667-1970§ ) with an interval of 15 minutes in between coats. 
Allow to dry for 16 hours. 

f) Sand with 320 wet or dry sand paper using kerosene as lubricants. 
Allow it to dry for 2 hours. 



♦Methods of sampling and test for varnishes and lacquers {first revision ). 
^Specification for varnish, finishing, exterior, synthetic (first revision). 
^Specification for wood filler, transparent, liquid. 
§Specification for thinner for cellulose nitrate based paints and lacquers. 

10 



IS : 10018 - 1981 

g) Spray 3 coats of lacquer, cellulose nitrate, clear, finishing, glossy, 
for wood, conforming to this specification after thinning one part 
of it with one and half parts of lacquer thinner ( conforming to 
IS : 5667-1970* ) with an interval of 20 minutes in between coats. 
Allow it to dry lor 16 hours. 

h) Sand down with 400 wet or dry sand paper using kerosene as the 
lubricant J wipe dry; allow to dry for one hour. 

j ) After this, one of the following shall be done: 

Spray one re-flow coat after thinning one part of the clear 
with 2| parts by volume of the lacquer thinner. Allow to dry 
for 16 hours. 

or 

After sanding with 400 abrasive paper, pull over the surfacer 
with bodying fluid. 

or 

After drying for 16 hours, instead of the re-flow coat, rub the 
surface with water rubbing compound to remove orange 
peal if any and to level the surface. 

k) Mechanical buffer may also be used. 

Then polish with suitable liquid polish and fanally with a good 
quality wax polish. 

E-3. PROCEDURE 

£-3.1 Prepare a panel up to stage (g) as given in E-2.2. Air dry for 16 hours 
and subject the same to rubbing as prescribed under £-2.2 ( h, j and k ). 

£-3.2 The material shall be deemed to have passed the test if the film 
polishes to a bright surface. 



APPENDIX F 

[ Table 1, Item (xi) ] 

TEST FOR SELF LIFTING 

F-1. PROCEDURE 

F-1.1 Panel prepared according to details given in E-2.2 shall not lift or 
wrinkle when touched up with the same lacquer after a period of 4 hours, 
24 hours, 7 days and 2 months. 



*Specification for thinner for cellulose nitrate based paints and lacquers. 

11 



IS : 10018 - 1981 



( Continued from page 2 ) 

Members 

Shri a. T. Borate 

Shri D. a, Patkt ( Alternate ) 
Shri A, A, Khan 

Shri J* N. Das ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Khasnobis Hindustan Motors Ltd, Hooghly 

Shri A. K. Chatterjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. K. S. Manx Addisons Paints and Chemicals Ltd, Madras 

Shri J. Rangarajan Goodlass Nerolac Paints Ltd, Bombay 

Shri P. B. Shah Asian Paints ( India ) Ltd, Bombay 



Representing 
The Premier Automobiles Ltd, Bombay 

Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 



12 



