**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 101-1-3 (1986) : Methods of sampling and test for paints, 
varnishes and related products. Part 1: Test on liquid 
paints (general and physical). Section 3: Preparation of 
panels [CHD 20: Paints, Varnishes and Related Products] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iimmK-^i^^^ T ^bi^ nvF^f 



::^^s^\n%i9^j^/;s^>^^^^ 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 JANUARY 1958 

TO 

IS 101 ( Part 1/Sec 3 ) 1 1986 METHODS OF SAMPLING 

AND TEST FOR PAINTS, VARNISHES AND RELATED 

PRODUCTS 

PART 1 TESTS ON LIQUID PAINTS ( GENERAL AND PHYSICAL ) 

Section 3 Preparation of Panels 

(TMrdRevision) 

( Page 1, clause 1.1A, para 1 ) — Substitute the following sentence for the 
existing last sentence: 

'The buniishing ot>eration by the use of power tools shall be as follows:' 

(CHD020) 

4076 BIS/08— 1 



UDC 667.613 : 620.115.8 Second Reprint NOVEMBER 2008 IS : 101 (Part 1/Sec 3) - 1986 

(Including Amendment No. 1 ) (Reaffirmed 2007) 



Indian Standard 

METHODS OF SAMPLING AND TEST FOR PAINTS, 
VARNISHES AND RELATED PRODUCTS 

PART 1 TESTS ON LIQUID PAINTS ( GENERAL AND PHYSICAL) 
Section 3 Preparation of Panels 

( Third Revision ) 



1. Scope — Prescribes procedures for the preparation, prior to painting of standard panels for use in 
general methods of test for paints, varnishes and related products. 

1 .1 This standard covers the following types of standard panels: 

a) Steel panels, 

b) Tin plate panels, 

c) Aluminium panels, 

d) Glass panels, 

©) Wood panels, and 

f) Cement/asbestos panels. 

2. Steel Panels 

2,1 Steel panels used for general testing shall be of mild steel, fully finished of deep drawing quality 
(5ee IS : 513-1963 Specification for cold rolled carbon steel sheets ) size 150x100x1*25 mm, free 
from surface imperfections, such as rolling marks and scores and scale, and shall be commercially 
available flat skin passed high grade sheet with minimum surface blemishes suitable for a high 
standard of surface finish. 

2.1.1 Before use, wipe the mild steel panels free from excess oil, roughly degrease with petroleum 
hydrocarbon solvent conforming to IS : 1745-1978 'Specification for petroleum hydrocarbon solvents 
( second revision )' or xylene conforming to IS : 359-1965 'Specification for xylole, industrial solvent 
grade ( rew5ec/)' and burnish uniformly with IS Grit No. 180 emery cloth conforming to IS: 715 
(Part1)-1976 'Specification for coated abrasives: Part 1 General application (third revision)' . 
Burnish lightly with petroleum hydrocarbon solvent conforming to IS : 1745-1978 'Specification for 
petroleum hydrocarbon solvents (5eco/7c/Aem/o/7)' to avoid embedding emery in the surface. The 
burnishing operation shall be as follows: 

a) Straight across the panel, in a direction parallel to any one side; 

b) Perpendicular to first direction and until all signs of original burnishing have been obliterated; 
and 

c) With a circular motion of diameter approximately 75 mm, until a pattern consisting of circular 
burnishing marks superimposed one upon another is produced. 

Remove the traces of emery dust by wiping with a linen rag. 

2.1.2 Degrease the panel by swabbing two or three times with a linen rag, soaked in suitable 
hydrocarbon solvent. Final swabbing shall be done with a clean rag soaked in clean hydrocarbon 
solvent. Dry the panels slightly to remove traces of condensed moisture, allow to return to room 
temperature and then paint without delay. The prepared surfaces should not be touched by hand or 
otherwise between degreasing and painting. 

3. Tinplate Panels 

3.1 l\Aateriaf — The panel shall be of tinned steel plate made by the cold reduction process. The steel 
substance shall have a nominal thickness of 0'3 mm and the tin coating shall be equivalent to a mass 
of 24'Og/m*. 

3.2 Preparation by Solvent Cleaning — It is not necessary for tinplate panels to be specially protected 
in storage before use in the same way as steel panels; nevertheless, the surface of the panels may be 
contaminated with lubricants during processing. It is therefore recommended that the panels should be 
cleaned before use by the procedure specified in 3.3 for steel panels. 



Adopted 27 January 1986 



O July 1986, BIS 



Qr2 



4076 BIS/08-2 BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 101 (Parti/Sec 3) -1986 

3.3 Preparation by Abrasion {Burnishing) — Burnished tinplate panels are recommended where a 
more uniform test surface is required that is produced by solvent cleaning. The burnishing operation 
shall be carried out as for steel panels (^ee 2.1.1 ) except that it shall be done much more lightly to 
avoid embedding abrasive in the surface and completely removing the tin coating in some places. 
It is therefore recommended to use a good quality, fine silicon carbide paper, for example, one with an 
abrasive grain size corresponding to 320 silicon carbide grit. 

3.3.1 The burnishing operation shall be continued until the whole of the surface of the panel is 
covered by a pattern of circular burnishing marks superimposed one upon another and the original 
surface pattern is no longer visible to the naked eye. 

3.3.2 The burnished panels shall be cleaned thoroughly before use according to the procedure 
specified in 2.1.2 to ensure that all loose grit, tin particles and other contaminants are removed. Care 
shall be taken to ensure that the surface of the finally cleaned panel is not touched by hand or other- 
wise contaminated. If the paint coating cannot be applied immediately, the cleaned panels shall be 
stored for a few days only in a desiccator until required. 

4. Aluminium Panels 

4.1 Materiai — Aluminium panels intended for general testing ( in contrast to aluminium or aluminium 
alloy panels required for testing to particular applications and uses ) shall be of sheet or strip com- 
plying with the chemical composition ( 990 percent purity ). Either soft ( annealed ) or hard materials 
shall be used, as specified for the particular test method. The hard aluminium shall have a tensile 
strength of at least 150 N/mm^ and the soft aluminium a tensile strength not greater than 105 N/mm^ 
The thickness and other dimensions of the panel shall be as specified in the test method or otherwise 
agreed. The sheet and strip shall not show any cracks when a test piece of the metal 20 mm wide 
and of convenient length, cut with the longer axis transverse to the direction of rolling and with the 
longer edges carefully rounded and smoothed longitudinally, if bent through 1 80° flat upon itself in the 
case of soft aluminium, or through 180° on a cylindrical former of radius equal to the thickness of the 
sheet in the case of hard aluminium. 

4.2 Preparation by Solvent Cleaning — Where clean panels are required without further preparation, 
the cleaning procedure used shalJ be that specified in-2,l-.2i.or steel panels. 

^.3 Preparation by Abrasion {Burnishing) — Where burnished panels are required, the procedure 
shall be essentially as specified in 2.1,1 for steel panels, except that the abrasive used shall be 
calcined alumina conforming to the following specification: 

Particles greater than 63 /^m 10 percent maximum 

Particles less than 20 f^m 70 percent minimum 

Particles less than 10 p^m 60 percent minimum 

4.3.1 The sequence of burnishing operations shall be as specified in 2.1.1 but the abrasive shall be 
wetted with mineral solvent for paint (white spirit) and applied to the panel surface on a pad of soft 
cloth or other suitable material. 

4.3.2 The burnishing operation shall be continued until the whole of the surface of the panel is 
covered by' a pattern of circular burnishing marks superimposed one upon another and the original 
surface pattern is no longer visible to the naked eye. 

4.3.3 The burnished panels shall be cleaned thoroughly before use according to the procedure 
specified in 2.1.2, to ensure that all loose grit, aluminium particles and other contaminants are 
removed. Care shall be taken to ensure that the surface of the finally cleaned panel is not touched by 
hand or otherwise contaminated. Aluminium panels shall only be prepared immediately prior to 
painting because if stored an oxide film is liable to form on the surface. 

4.4 Preparation by Acid Chromating — Where aluminium panels are prepared by acid chromating for 
general testing ( in contrast to those required for testing to particular applications and uses), it is 
recommended that the following procedure shall be used. 



IS :101 ( Parti/Sec 3 ) -1986 

4.4.1 Clean the panels as specified in 2.1.2 until, after allowing the solvents to evaporate, it can 
be uniformly wetted with water and immerse them for 20 min at 55 ± 5°C in an acid chromate solution 
contained in a glass or polyethylene vessel. The solution shall be prepared as follows: 

Dissolve 100 g of analytical reagent quality potassium or sodium dichromate in 1000 ml of 
distilled water and add slowly, while stirring, 170 ml of analytical reagent quality sulphuric acid 
{ 1'84 g/ml ). [See IS : 266-1977 Specification for sulphuric acid {second revision).] 

( SAFETY WARNING : When preparing and using acid chromate solutions, the operator shall wear 
safety goggles and rubber gloves. ) 

4.4.2 Remove the panels from the solution and wash them thoroughly and as rapidly as possible in 
cold and then in hot distilled water (or demineralized water of specific resistance of at least 10® 
ohm-cm ). Allow the panels to dry and then coat them as soon as possible with the paint. Care shall 
be taken to ensure that the prepared surface is not touched by hand or otherwise contaminated before 

painting. 

Note — The chromate solution will become exhausted with use and shall be renewed when necessary. 

5. Glass Panels 

5.1 Materiai — The panels shall be of float or polished plate glass. The thickness and other 
dimensions of the panels shall be specified in the test method or otherwise agreed. 

5.2 Preparation by Solvent Cleaning — The panels shall be cleaned by the procedure specified in 2.1.2 
for steel panels. 

5.3 Preparation by Detergent Cleaning — The panels shall be washed thoroughly in a warm, aqueous, 
non-ionic detergent solution and then rinsed thoroughly with warm distilled water ( or demineralized 
water of specific resistance of at least 10® ohm-cm ). 

5.3.1 The cleaned panels shall be dried by evaporation of ^ the final washing water and may be 
slightly warmed to remove any traces of condensed moisture. Care shall be taken to ensure that the 
prepared surface is not touched by hand or otherwise to prevent contamination before painting. 

6. Wood Panels — Unless specified otherwise in the material specification, panels shall be made 
from teak wood ( Tectona grandis Lin. f., fam. Verbenaceae) and shall be 200x100X100 mm in size. 

6.1 Wood panels shall be unused, flat grained and of even texture, and shall be free from knots, 
shakes, cracks and blemishes. The wood shall be well-seasoned and its moisture content shall not 
exceed 12 percent. The panel surface should be smooth and shall be rubbed with IS Grit No. 180 
emery cloth conforming to IS : 715 ( Part 1 )-1976 'Specification for coated abrasives: Part 1 General 
applications ( r/7/rf/ rem/b/?)'. All surface dust shall be removed before painting by wiping with a 
clean and dry linen rag. 

7. Cement/Asbestos Panels 

7.1 Concrete Panels — Of size 1 50 X 1 50 X 1 25 mm prepared as follows: 

Cement [ 5ee IS : 269-1976 Specification for ordinary, 

and low heat portland cement ( third revision ) ] 450 g 

Sand [see IS : 650-1966 Specification for standard sand 

for testing of cement ( revised) ] gOQ g 

Aggregates [see IS : 383-1970 Specification for coarse 
and fine aggregates from natural sources for concrete 
( second revision ) ] 450 g 

Water 180 g 

Cast the mix into a mould 30x30 XI 2'5 cm in size, suitably partitioned to give four panels. 
Trowel cut the top surface of the block after compacting and levelling with a wooden float, taking 
care that all the material remain in the mould. The blocks are allowed to harden in air for 24 hours 
and then cured in water for 14 days. They are ready for use after this, and shall be stored in a place 
free from chemical fumes. 



IS: 101 (Parti/Sec 3) -1986 

EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This Indian Standard is one of the series dealing with sampling and testing of paints, varnishes 
and related products. For many of the widely used test methods, the type of panel used and the 
particular way in which it is prepared for use affect the test results to a significant degree. Consequ- 
ently, it is important to standardize as carefully as possible both the panels and preparation procedure 
employed for these tests. It is equally desirable to reduce to a minimum the number of different 
standard panels required for use in a paint testing laboratory. In the preparation of this standard 
considerable assistance has been derived from ISO 1514-1984 'Paints and Varnishes— Standard panels 
for testing' issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO). This standard supersedes 
5 of IS : 101-1964' Methods of test for ready mixed paints and enamels { second revision )\ 



MGIPRRND-4076 BIS/08—200 Copies 



