•••*****•*•••••• 



* i&& 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 



Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
'The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 10071 (1981) : Methods of measurement for hot cathode gas 
filled tubes [LITD 4: Electron Tubes and Display Devices] 



\*^!iIUZ£^±2^T<!>^lXY&& 



2$as\ v i i>5ft>5^>«sv: 



^^\\X^L 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledg 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




<a^EL 




!**> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS t 10071 - 1981 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF MEASUREMENT FOR 
HOT CATHODE GAS FILLED TUBES 



UDC 621-3371 ; 621*317»3 




<0 Copyright I^H2 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BIIAVAN; S BAHADUR SKAIl 2AFAR MARC 
NEW DELHI ] 10002 

£ r 7 December 1 9fl2 



IS : 10071 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF MEASUREMENT FOR 
HOT CATHODE GAS-FILLED TUBES 

Electron Tubes Sectional Committee 3 LTDG 9 

Chairman Representing 

Shri H. R. Bapu Seetharam Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Members 

Shri B. S. Venugopalan ( Alternate to 
Shri H. R. Bapu Seetharam ) 
Dr S. S. S. Agarwala Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute 

( GSIR ), Pilani 
Dr G. S. Sidhu ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. P. Ghosh National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri B. C. Mukherjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. K.Jain Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Dr J. N. Maiti West Bengal Electronics Industrial Development 

Corporation Ltd, Calcutta 
Dr P. B. Parikh The Radio Electronics and Television Manufacturers' 

Association ( RETMA ), Bombay 
Representative Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 

Research Engineer Directorate General of All India Radio, New Delhi 

Shri P. S. Saran Posts and Telegraphs Department, New Delhi 

Shri G. K. Saran ( Alternate ) 
Shri Sarwan Kumar Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi 

Shri V. S. Mttra ( Alternate ) 
Coi, R. K. Sue Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri G. N. Sahai ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. K. Taneja Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri R. Soundhirarajan ( Alternate ) 
Dr R. C. Tripathi Department of Electronics, New Delhi 

Shri Tek Chandani ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. C. Jain, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Head ( Electronics ) 

Secretary 

Shri Pa van Kumar 
Assistant Director ( Electronics ), ISI 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10071 - 1981 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Panel for Cathode-Ray Tubes and TV Camera Tubes, LTDC 9 : P4 

Convener Representing 

Shri G. K. Bhide Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Members 

Shri J, S. Isaac ( Alternate to 
Shri G. K. Bhide ) 
Dr Kailash Chandra National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi 

Shri Jooinder Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. K. Jain Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Research Engineer Directorate General of All India Radio, New Delhi 



IS i 10071 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF MEASUREMENT FOR 
HOT CATHODE GAS-FILLED TUBES 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 20 October 1981, after the draft finalized by the Electron Tubes Sectional 
Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication 
Division Council. 

* 
0.2 This standard deals with the methods of measurements of the character- 
istics of hot cathode gas filled electron tubes. 

0.3 In preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from IEC 
Publication 151-17 ( 1969 ) 'Measurements of the electrical properties of 
electronic tubes : Part 1 7 Methods of measurement of gas-filled tubes and 
valves' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission. 

0.4 In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this standard, 
if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be 
done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 



1. SCOPE 



of the following types of hot cathode gas-filled electron tubes: 

a) Hot cathode tubes, 

b) Gas-filled rectifier tubes, and 

c) Thyratrons, except for those used for pulse modulation. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS : 1885 
( Part IV/Sec 1 )-1973f, in addition to the following shall apply. 



*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised). 

fElectrotechnical vocabulary : Part IV Electron tubes, Section 1 Common terms (first 
revision ). 



IS : 10071 - 1981 

2.1 Gas-filled Rectifier Tube — A gas-filled tube whose function is to 
rectify an alternating current. 

2.2 Thyratron — A hot cathode gas-filled tube in which one or more 
electrodes initiate, but do not control the anode current. 

2.3 Electrodes and Gaps 

2.3.1 Main Gap — The conduction path which carries the load current. 

2.4 Critical Grid Voltage — The instantaneous value of the grid voltage 
in a thyratron at which the load current starts to flow across the main gap 
for a specified anode voltage and under specified conditions. 

2.5 Critical Anode Voltage — The instantaneous value of the anode 
voltage in a thyratron at which the load current starts to flow across the 
main gap for a specified grid voltage and under specified conditions. 

2.6 Control Characteristic — A relation, usually shown by a graph, 
between critical grid voltage and anode voltage. 

2.7 Maintaining Voltage — The difference of potential between the 
cathode and a stated electrode of a gas-filled tube when that electrode is 
carrying current. 

2.8 Repeatability of Difference of Potential — The ability of a gas-filled 
tube to attain the same anode maintaining voltage at a stated time after 
the beginning of any conducting period. 

Note — The lack of repeatability is expressed by the change in this voltage from 
one conducting period to any other, the operating conditions remaining unchanged. 

2.9 Voltage Jump — An abrupt change in the tube voltage drop of a 
thyratron during operation. 

Note — This may occur either during life under constant operating conditions, 
or as the current or temperature is varied over the operating range. 

2.10 Critical Grid Current — The value of grid current corresponding 
to the critical grid voltage at the instant when the discharge has just been 
established. 

2.11 Ionization Time — The time interval between the initiation and 
the establishment of a discharge in a gas-filled tube, for example, the time 
interval from the application of the grid voltage to the instant at which 
the tube voltage drop attains a stated value under specified operating 
conditions. 



IS : 10071 - 1981 

2.12 Recovery Time — The time required after interruption of anode 
current for the grid to regain control under specified operating conditions. 

2.13 Condensed Mercury Temperature — The temperature measured 
on the outside of the tube envelope in the region where the mercury is 
condensing ( in tubes with glass envelopes ) or at a specified point ( in 
tubes with metal envelopes ) . 

3. PRECAUTIONS FOR MEASUREMENT 

3.1 The characteristics of gas-filled tubes differ substantially from those 
of vacuum tubes. Because the tube voltage drop is nealry independent of 
the magnitude of current conducted and the grid in general has no control 
after the discharge has started, the current through the tube is determined 
principally by the applied voltage and the circuit parameters. Sufficient 
impedance shall always be used in series with the anode and the grid to 
limit the anode and grid currents, following ignition, to values low enough 
to prevent damage to the tube. 

3.2 The pressure of the vapour in mercury vapour tubes affects the electrical 
characteristics and is a rapidly varying function of the condensed mercury 
temperature. In measuring mercury vapour tubes care shall therefore be 
taken to control condensed mercury temperature in order to obtain re- 
producible results. In general, with increase of temperature, the tube 
voltage drop and peak forward voltage will decrease, the peak inverse 
voltage that the tube will withstand will decrease, the critical grid voltage 
will become more negative and the recovery time will become longer. 

3.2.1 In general, the time required to attain the desired condensed 
mercury temperature is longer than the cathode heating time. 

3.3 When measuring the maximum peak inverse voltage or the control 
characteristics, precautions must be taken to ensure that no condensed 
mercury exists in the upper parts of the tube. This is generally achieved 
by a preheating process in which only cathode heating power is applied 
to the tube. The tube must be maintained in an upright position, away 
from air currents, in order to prevent mercury from recondensing in the 
upper part of the envelope. Where forced air cooling is used, it should 
be so arranged that no temperature differential is created resulting in 
condensation of mercury in the upper part of the envelope. 

4. METHODS OF MEASUREMENT 

4.1 Filament or Heater Electrical Characteristics 

4.1.1 Readings of heater current and voltage are taken with voltage 
applied only to the filament or heater terminals. The current should be 
measured when it has reached equilibrium. 



IS : 10071 - 1981 

PRECAUTION — The resistance of a cold filament or heater 
is much smaller than its resistance under normal operating conditions. 
If the filament of a tube of high power is connected directly to the heating 
source, excessive filament current may flow and cause damage to the tube 
or to the measurement equipment. Therefore, it may be necessary to limit 
the filament current to some specified starting value. 

For tubes with high filament current, it may be necessary to correct 
for voltage drop in the socket when the voltage is measured at the socket 
terminals. 

4.2 Control Characteristics 

4.2.0 Data for plotting the control characteristics are obtained as follows. 

4.2.1 Critical Grid Voltage 

4.2.1.1 With voltage applied to the filament or heater, and with 
sufficient direct voltage applied to the control grid to prevent conduction, 
alternating voltage is applied to the anode through a resistance which will 
limit the current during conduction to a suitable value ( see Fig. 1 ). 

4.2.1.2 The control grid voltage is gradually made more positive 
( or less negative ) until anode current flows as a result of breakdown 
( the occurrence of an arc ) between the anode and the cathode of the tube 
and the critical grid voltage is noted just before the discharge. If the critical 
grid voltage is positive, appreciable grid current may flow before break- 
down. The grid voltage must then be measured at the grid terminal. 

4.2*1.3 The condensed mercury temperature of mercury vapour 
tubes should be held to the desired value, which should be recorded with 
the results. This value is dependent upon operating conditions and the 
tube structure, but it is in general between 20°C and 50°C. For tubes having 
shield grids, the shield grid potential is an additional parameter, and 
should be held at a specified value, usually zero. 




Fig. 1 Circuit Arrangement for Measuring Grto 
Current and Voltage 



IS : 10071 - 1981 

PRECAUTION — It may be necessary to use a capacitor of 
small value between each grid and the cathode to prevent possible anode 
voltage surges from affecting the grid voltage. A capacitor can affect the 
result if the measurement is made using a grid resistor of large value. This 
is because the capacitor integrates the grid current which flows during 
different parts of the cycle. 

The grid resistor shall be sufficiently high to avoid overloading the 
grid when the tube is conducting and sufficiently low to have negligible 
affect on the measured result. 

For directly heated tubes it is normally necessary to specify that the 
cathode return be made either to the centre tap of the filament transformer 
or to the centre tap of the filament if present. 

However, in the case of tubes having a filament terminal which is 
internally connected to a filament shield and which is specified by the 
manufacturer to be used as a cathode terminal the voltage reference point 
must be the terminal quoted by the manufacturer. 

If the tube is directly heated, the relative phasing of the filament and 
anode voltages should be prescribed. 

4.2.2 Critical Anode Voltage 

4.2.2.1 With voltage applied to the filament or heater, the grid or 
grids, if present, are held at desired voltages and the alternating anode 
voltage is increased until anode current flows as the result of breakdown 
( the occurrence of an arc ) between the anode and cathode of the tube. 
The peak value of the anode voltage at this point is the critical anode 
voltage. Sufficient resistance must be inserted into the anode circuit to 
limit the current during conduction to a suitable value. 

PRECAUTION — For directly heated tubes it is normally 
necessary to specify that the cathode return be made either to the centre 
tap of the filament transformer or to the centre tap of the filament if present. 

However, in the case of tubes having a filament terminal which is 
internally connected to a filament shield and which is specified by the 
manufacturer to be used as a cathode terminal, the voltage reference 
point must be the terminal quoted by the manufacturer. 

If the tube is directly heated, the relative phasing of the filament and 
anode voltages should be prescribed. 

4.3 Emission 

4,3.1 For a tube of given design, the voltage drop is primarily a function 
of emission. Lower voltage drop is an indication of higher emission. 



IS : 10071 - 1981 



4.3.1.1 The electron-emission characteristic of a gas-filled tube is 
commonly determined by measurement of the voltage drop at an anode 
current sufficiently high to indicate cathode capability. This is sometimes 
done under conditions of continuous-current conduction, 

4.3.1.2 An intermittent-conduction method is more accurate because 
of the reduction of cathode heating or cooling by arc current. Formation 
of a cathode spot, as indicated by a discontinuous reduction in the arc 
drop, indicates faulty cathode operation. 

4.3.2 Direct and Alternating Voltage Methods 

4.3.2.1 With the desired voltage applied to the filament or heater, 
with an anode supply voltage sufficient to cause firing, and with the cathode 
current limited to the desired value by a series resistor, the voltage drop 
is measured by a voltmeter if direct voltage is used, and by an oscillograph 
or other suitable means if alternating voltage is used. In the latter case, 
the voltage is read at the instant the current is at its peak value. 

4.3.2.2 The tube to be measured shall be inserted into the low voltage 
circuit of an alternating voltage source ( see Fig. 2A ). The grid shall be 
connected to the anode through a given resistance R g . By varying the load 
resistance R u an effective value of the anode current can be read at the 
moment at which a hump on the anode voltage curve is observed on the 
oscillograph screen ( see Fig. 2B ) . The peak value of the anode current 
which is approximately equal to the cathode emission current is calculated 
from the effective value of the anode current. 



<*> 



Ik /±s 



i — f r 



TO OSCILLOGRAPH 

► „:• 



2 A 



HUMP FORMATION 




2 B 
Fig. 2 Determination of the Cathode Emission Current by avjEANS of 
an Oscillograph Displaying the Curve of the Tube Voltage Drop 



IS : 10071 - 1901 

4.3.3 Intermittent Voltage Method 

4.3.3.1 With the desired voltage applied to the filament or heater, 
with the cathode current limited to a desired value by the circuit, and 
with the anode voltage to be applied intermittently at a duty factor such 
that appreciable heating or cooling of the cathode does not occur, the tube 
voltage drop is measured by an oscillograph or other suitable means at 
the instant when the current is at its peak value. The period of conduction 
shall be of sufficient duration to ensure that the tube is sufficiently ionized 
to make the measured voltage drop independent of the conduction period. 

PRECAUTION — In both these methods any grids having 
separate terminals should be connected to the anode either directly or 
through a current limiting resistor. The value of resistance shall be specified 
since the tube voltage drop is affected by the current distribution between 
the grid and the anode. 

Since the voltage drop in mercury vapour tubes varies with vapour 
pressure, the permissible range of condensed mercury temperature should 
be controlled within narrow limits. 

4.4 Grid Current 

4.4.1 The critical grid current of a thyratron is a function of the anode 
voltage and includes positive ion, electrons and leakage currents. The 
interelectrode capacitance charging currents may also be important. 

4.4.1.1 These grid currents are usually of low value. They are generally 
measured by reading the voltage drop across a resistor in series with the 
grid. 

4.4.2 Critical Grid Voltage Method (for Tubes having Negative Control 
Characteristics ) 

4.4.2.1 The critical grid voltage method for determining grid current 
is usually employed with the tube heated to operating temperature by 
conduction of rated average anode current. With the desired value of 
alternating anode voltage and with the grid supply voltage adjusted to 
assure substantially full half-wave conduction, the impedance of the anode 
circuit is adjusted so that the specified anode current is established. With a 
resistance R% in series with the grid, as shown in the circuit of Fig. 1, the 
grid supply voltage is then made more negative until conduction ceases. 

This voltage is denoted by F,. The measurement is then repeated 
with a different resistance R g , which should be sufficiently low so that 
there is a negligible voltage drop across it due to preconduction grid 
currents and sufficiently large to avoid variations in grid supply voltage 
resulting from the grid current during conduction. The second measured 



IS : 10071 - 1981 

value is denoted by V z . Since the critical grid voltage can be assumed to 
have the same values in both measurements, the grid current flowing 
just before conduction is : 

R g — Ri g 

4.4.2.2 Normally i?' g is much less than R u and can be neglected. The 
frequency should be low enough for the effect of the tube and circuit 
capacitances to be neglected. The primary electron emission from the 
grid is a function of the grid temperature. In order that the full value of 
total grid current can be measured, the grid must be heated by operating 
the tube at the desired values of anode current for an adequate time im- 
mediately before the measurements are made. In this measurement, the 
shield grid, if any, is connected to the cathode. Other grid current measure- 
ments may be made with direct voltage on the shield grid. 

PRECAUTION — This method may be inaccurate if the 
positive ion current to the grid resulting from the preconduction current 
in the thyratron is comparable in magnitude to the other grid current 
components, and if the value of R g is too great. 

4.4.3 Grid Thermionic Emission Current — The tube to be measured is 
connected as shown in the circuit of Fig. 3. Before measurements are made, 
the tube shall carry the nominal anode current for the time required for 
all its parts to be heated and to reach a stable temperature. 




—f\iM—- 



Note — The switches .5, and S 2 are ganged, so that the; open simultaneously. 
Fig. 3 Circuit Arrangement for Measuring the Grid Thermionic 

Emission Current 

A negative grid voltage of a value sufficient to extinguish the discharge 
is then applied, the anode circuit is disconnected and simultaneously the 
micro-ammeter is connected into the grid circuits. 

PRECAUTION ~ The mercury vapour tubes should be measured 
at the maximum permissible ambient temperature. 



10 



IS : 10071 - 1981 



4.5 Surge Current 

4.5.1 The ability of a tube to withstand a forward surge current without 
excessive damage is checked in a circuit in which the tube is connected 
in series with a high current device such as an ignitron, as shown in Fig. 4. 




c 



> 



IGNITER CONTROL 





A A A TEST CURRENT 



WAVEFORM 



Fig. 4 Circuit Arrangement for Surge Current Measurements 

4.5.2 By control of the ignitron, the desired peak value of half-wave 
current can be passed through the tube for a definite time. 

4.6 Operation Measurement 

4.6.1 Gas-filled tubes may be subjected to an operation measurement 
by operating them in conventional rectifier circuits. This is intended for 
observing any visual flash over inside when the tube is subjected for a 
specified peak inverse voltage and time. Fig. 5 shows a typical full wave, 
single-phase circuit. Fig. 6 shows a typical three-phase zig-zag circuit 
as connected for thyratrons. When measuring diodes, the grid circuits are 
eliminated. The tube is operated at a definite temperature for a definite 
time to observe the frequency of arc-back and whether grid control is lost. 
The severity of the measurement condition depends upon a number of 
factors such as those illustrated in Fig. 7. 

4.6.2 The following also include some other important factors : 

a) Peak anode current, 

b) Peak inverse anode voltage, 

c) Current at the beginning of commutation, 

d) Inverse voltage immediately after commutation, 

e) Commutating time, and 

f) Arc-back current (being a short circuit current not shown in 
the waveform ) . 



11 



IS : 10071 - 1981 




•J 
















p^n 




PHASE 
SHIFTER 







Fig. 5 Circuit Arrangement for Single-Phase 
Rectifier Operation Measurement 




Fig. 6 Circuit Arrangement for Three-Phase 
Rectifier Operation Measurement 



12 



IS : 10071 - 1981 



i—COMMUTATED CURRENT 
(AT THE BEGINNING OF 
COMMUTATION) 

PEAK ANODE CURRENT 




TUBE CURRENT 



TUBE VOLTAGE 

INITIAL 

INVERSE 

VOLTAGE 

>— PEAK INVERSE VOLTAGE 

Fig. 7 Typical Three-Phase Rectifier Waveforms 

4.6.3 The magnitude of these factors depends upon the following circuit 
parameters : 

a) Number of phases of the rectifier, 

b) Type of filtering circuit, 

c) Transformer impedance, 

d) Type of load circuit ( the power may be absorbed either by a 
resistor or by a reverse emf load. Examples of the latter are a 
battery, a capacitor, or a motor, which can increase the arc- 
back current ) , 

e) Firing angle in grid controlled tubes, and 

f) The impedance of the arc-back circuit. 

4.6.4 The correlation of measurement results may be difficult unless the 
measurements are made under conditions that are identical with respect 
to the foregoing parameters. For convenience, this measurement is often 
made with a full wave, single-phase rectifier operating into a resistive load, 
such as a water resistor. The influence of the factors (c), (d) and (e) in 4.6.2 
is then minimized. In order to make the measurement comparable in 
severity with a polyphase measurement, it is usually necessary to increase 
the measurement, voltage. 

4.6.5 ' Cheater Circuit ' Measurement 

4.6.5.1 It is possible to construct measurement circuits, called ' cheater 
circuits ', which simulate the current and voltage waveforms of the circuit 
described in 4.6. These circuits usually consist of high-current, low-voltage 
sources of power to supply the forward current through the tube under 
measurement, and low-current high-voltage sources to supply inverse 



13 



IS j 10071 - 1981 

voltage after the end of the conduction period. Synchronous switching 
methods are used to switch from one source to another at the proper time 
in the cycle. The object of such circuits is to reduce the energy requirements 
and the equipment cost. This usually requires that the high-voltage source 
of power be of relatively small capacity and high impedance. The current 
through the tube on occurrence of arc-back is therefore relatively small, 
Under such conditions, it is possible that the rate of occurrence of arc-back 
may be reduced compared to that which would be obtained from a power 
source of lower impedance. By the use of sensitive arc-back indicators, the 
small reverse currents that flow when arc-back occur can be observed. 
Such a method of measurement requires careful correlation of measurement 
results with those obtained under actual working conditions. The thermal 
conditions of the tube are different from those under normal working 
conditions as the anode bombardment is reduced during the non-conduction 
period because of the high impedance of the circuit. The switching between 
sources is done by a rotating commutator or by a suitable thyratron circuit. 
Fig. 8 shows one form of ' cheater circuit ' in which switching is accom- 
plished by thyratrons. 




VOLTAGE PHASE LAG 



VOLTAGE 



©=V0LTAGE SUPPLY ©=PHASE CONTROL 
(5)=CURRENT SUPPLY 



Fig. 8 Typical 'Cheater Circuit' Rectifier Measurement 



IS : 10071 - 1981 
4.7 Thermal Measurements for Hot Cathode Mercury Tubes 

4.7.1 The operating temperature of a hot cathode mercury vapour 
tube cooled by air convection, depends on the power dissipated in the tube 
and on the efficiency of the air cooling. The latter depends on the ambient 
air temperature and on the air flow past the cooling surfaces of the tube. 
The time required for the temperature of a tube to rise from a low value 
to its minimum desired operating value depends on the filament power 
and on the ambient temperature. Tube arc losses are not involved, because 
the tube should not be allowed to conduct before it is heated to the minimum 
operating temperature. 

4.7.2 The temperature should be measured on the outside of the tube 
envelope at a point approximately 1 cm above the base. 

4.7.3 Baffles or other means should be used to prevent extraneous air- 
currents. 

4.7.4 Condensed Mercury Temperature 

4.7.4.1 The method of measuring the condensed mercury temperature 
is by means of a thermocouple in close contact with the tube in the region 
in which the mercury is condensing. The location of the thermocouple is 
usually immediately above the base of a glass tube or on the radiator of a 
metal tube. The diameter of the thermocouple wire must be small enough 
to make the error caused by heat conduction negligible. The measurement 
can also be made by means of a thermistor thermometer or with a mercury 
or alcohol thermometer. 

4.7.4.2 Rale of condensed mercury temperature rise — The condensed 
mercury temperature of the tube is measured as a function of time, starting 
at the time the heater circuit is closed. The heater voltage should be held 
constant, preferably at the lowest desired operating value. The data obtained 
may be plotted as a curve of temperature rise above ambient temperature 
versus time. 

4.7.5 Equilibrium Condensed Mercury Temperature Rise 

4.7.5.1 With the filament or heater voltage at the highest operating 
value and with maximum average anode current, the condensed mercury 
temperature rise at equilibrium is measured for various ambient tempera- 
tures. The data obtained may be presented as a curve of condensed mercury 
temperature versus ambient temperature. 

15 



IS : 10071 - 1981 

4.8 Recovery Time 

4.8.0 The recovery time is a function of a number of variables, among 
the more important of which are the voltage and the impedance of the 
grid circuit, the anode current prior to extinction of the anode voltage, 
and ( in mercury vapour tubes ) the temperature of the envelope. 

4.8.1 Capacitor Discharge Method 

4.8.1.1 Method 1 — If a charged capacitor is connected between the 
anode and the cathode of a conducting gas-filled tube in the proper polarity 
to make the anode negative with respect to the cathode, the anode current 
will be interrupted. The current initially flowing through the tube then 
discharges the capacitor and the anode voltage rises towards the anode 
supply voltage at a rate dependent upon the parameters of the discharging 
circuit. At the same time, the anode voltage required for re-ignition rises 
at a rate dependent upon the rate of disappearance of ions in the inter- 
electrode region. If the anode voltage at no time exceeds the re-ignition 
voltage, the anode current remains off until the grid voltage is again raised 
above the critical value. Figure 9 shows a circuit using this principle to a 
measure recovery time. The tube under measurement is conducting direct 
current of the desired value. The capacitor, which is connected in parallel 
with the load resistor i?, is charged via R in such polarity that the terminal 
connected to the tube anode is negative. When the switch is closed the anode 
voltage Vs. becomes negative, and the conduction therefore ceases. The 
capacitor then discharges through the load resistor i?,. The waveform of 
the voltage across the tube is also shown in Fig. 9. 

In this method, the recovery time, t, is arbitrarily considered to be the 
time taken by the anode voltage Pa to rise to a value equal to the tube 
voltage drop, with the capacitance adjusted to the smallest value at which 
the tube stops conducting for a desired percentage of a number of trials. 
The recovery time can be calculated from the formula: 

t ^ /vC* frn ~ jt~ ~jf 
Vs — Va 

where 

F a is the tube voltage drop, and 
F s is the supply voltage. 

Note — -When the tube voltage drop is less than 10 percent of the anode supply 
voltage, it may, without serious error, be assumed to be zero. The formula for 
recovery time then simplifies to t = 0"7iJC. 

4.8.1.2 Method 2 — In the circuit arrangement given in Fig. 10A the 
capacitor discharge takes place directly in the RC circuit. The required 
voltage F g should be applied to the grid of the tube being measured. Then 
the voltages F, and F 2 are applied, the switch S x being in position 1. To 
initiate anode breakdown the anode voltage is applied to the grid for a 
short time by means of switch S 2 . 

16 




SWITCH (S) f 
CLOSED 




TIME 



TIME AVAILABLE FOR 
DEIONIZATlON 



Fio. 9 Circuit Arrangement for Measuring Recovery Time by 
Capacitor Discharge Method 

The current in the load circuit of the tube under measurement should 
then be adjusted to the desired value. After this, the tube carries the anode 
current for the time required to reach thermal equilibrium. 

When the switch «£, is returned to position 2, the conduction in the 
tube ceases and the anode re-ignition voltage oi the tube begins to rise. 
At the same time, a rise of voltage between the anode and cathode will 
occur. The rate of the anode voltage rise is determined by the time constant 
of the capacitor discharge ( RC). The moment the anode voltage reaches 
a value equal to the re-ignition voltage anode breakdown again occurs. 
This value of the re-ignition voltage is determined by means of an oscillo- 
graph and several values are measured by varying the capacitance C 

The recovery time, t, can be calculated from the formula: 



where 



V j - 



Fa 



Vs. is the tube voltage drop, and 
V 3 is the re-ignition voltage. 



17 



IS : 10071 - 1981 

The characteristics of the anode re-ignition voltage versus time is 
plotted from the measured values of the re-ignition voltage and the corres- 
ponding calculated values of the time obtained both at the fixed grid bias 
and at the constant load current ( see Fig. 10B). This method makes it 
possible to plot the initial part of the characteristic of the recovery time 
versus time. 



Si «i 




TO 
"OSCILLOGRAPH 



Fig. 10A Circuit Arrangement for Determining the Recovery Time 
by Alternative Capacitor Discharge Method 



c,<c 2 <c 3 




Fig. 10B Curve Illustrating the Method of Measuring the 
Recovery Time According to the Circuit of Fig. 10A 



18 



IS : 10071 - 1981 

4.8.2 Pulse Method 

4.8.2.1 This method consists oi' passing a rectangular pulse of current 
through the tube under measurement and then, at a variable time after 
the cessation of anode current, applying to the anode a rectangular voltage 
pulse in the forward direction. 

4.8.2.2 It is usually convenient to obtain the anode current pulse 
and the anode voltage pulse from different pulse generators. The time and 
amplitude of the pulses are measured using suitable cathode-ray oscillo- 
scopes. 

4.8.2.3 This method is repetitive and a 50 Hz, 60 Hz or greater re- 
petition rate gives continuously observable results. A block schematic 
diagram is shown in Fig. 1 1 and the waveforms that occur are shown in 
Fig. 12. 

TRIGGER PULSE 



CAPACITIVE 
VOLTAGE DIVIDER 
IF REQUIRED] 




1. Grid pulse generator ( low impedance ) 5. Cathode-ray oscilloscope for anode voltage 

2. Grid supply voltage measurement 

3. Cathode-ray oscilloscope for grid voltage 6. Anode current pulse generator 

measurement 7. Probe pulse delay 

4. Cathode-ray oscilloscope to measure Iv 8. Probe pulse generator 

Fig. 11 Block Schematic Diagram for Pulse Method of Recovery 

Time Measurements 



19 



IS : 10071 - 1981 



ANODE 
PROBE 
PULSE 



UJl- 

G- Z 

2 § 

I- O 

o 

§g 

oz 



ADJUSTABLE TIME DELAY 



/" 



TUBE 
OOES NOT 
RE-IGNITE 



RECOVERY TIME-*' 



L_ 



TUBE JUST 
RE-IGNITES 



Fig. 12 Diagrams Showing the Anode Waveforms When Measuring 
Recovery Time by the Probe Pulse Method 

4.8.2.4 The current pulse through the tube is adjusted to the required 
value. This is measured with the oscilloscope input connected across a 
small current measuring resistor ( Rk) in the tube cathode circuit. The 
grid supply voltage is set to the required value, and the grid pulse ignites 
the tube at the start of the current pulse period. The anode voltage wave- 
form across the tube is then displayed on an oscilloscope using a capacitive 
potential divider if necessary. This anode waveform contains a small pulse 
during the conduction period. This pulse represents the tube voltage drop 
plus the small voltage drop in the current measuring resistor. 



20 



IS : 10071 - 1981 

4.8.2.5 The trailing edge of this pulse serves as a reference and all 
the measurements are made from it. The amplitude of the anode probe 
pulse is set to the required value, having first set the time delay to near 
maximum. The oscilloscope shows the anode probe pulse in full when its 
leading edge is delayed from the cessation of conduction by a period greater 
than the recovery time of the tube to be measured. The forward anode 
probe pulse may then be advanced towards the current pulse until the 
anode pulse is clipped because forward re-ignition is occurring. The recovery 
time is taken as the minimum time after the cessation of conduction at 
which no clipping of the forward anode probe pulse can be seen. 

PRECAUTION — The actual grid voltage when the probe 
pulse is applied may differ from the grid supply voltage. This is due to a 
grid ion current flowing through the resistor R g and due to coupling of the 
grid to the anode probe pulse by the anode-grid capacitance. If it is not 
possible to measure the actual grid potential when the probe pulse is applied, 
the error produced by these effects should be kept to a minimum by using 
a low value of R g . 

When the recovery time is measured using pulse techniques, the ratc- 
of-rise of the forward anode potential pulse must be greater than the rate 
of recovery of the critical anode voltage. 

4.8.3 Inverter Method — The time necessary for recovery may be measured 
by connecting two of the tubes in an inverter circuit, as shown in Fig. 13. 

4.8.3.1 It is common practice to use a tube of known characteristics 
in this circuit, together with the tube to be measured. The measurement 
circuit is similar to a full-wave single-phase rectifier except that the load, 
a dc generator in this case, can cause current to flow through the tubes. 

4.8.3.2 Triggering pulses are applied to the grids of the tubes so that 
each tube ignites a short time before the alternating voltage on its anode 
becomes negative. The dc generator in combination with the smoothing 
reactor forces current through the tubes in opposition to the transformer 
voltage. 

4.8.3.3 Thus, during the greater part of the ac cycle, power flows 
from the generator to the ac source. The operation of the circuit may be 
visualized by referring to the circuit of Fig. 13 and to the voltage and 
current waveforms in Fig. 14. Current to be flowing in tube No. 2, is 
assumed as shown in Fig. 14c. Since the voltage drop in the tube is 
small relative to the applied voltages, the voltage of point F in Fig. 13 
may be assumed to be equal to that at point E as long as tube No. 2 is 
conducting. From Fig. 13 and 14a, it can be seen that, with (ube No. 2 
conducting, the anode of tube No. 1 is positive with respect to its cathode 

21 



IS : 10071 - 1981 

during the latter portion of the conduction cycle of tube No. 2 and tube 
No. 1 is kept from conducting only because its grid bias is more negative 
than the critical value. At point 2 of Fig. 14a, the grid of the tube No. 1 
is pulsed as shown in Fig. 14j. 







POLARISATION 
BIAS 



PEAKING TRANSFORMER 



PHASE SHIFTER 



©^OSCILLOSCOPE 
Fig. 13 Inverter Circuit for Measuring Recovery Time 

4.8.3.4 Tube No. 1 immediately starts to conduct. However, because 
of the leakage inductance of the transformer, the current through the 
transformer secondary DE cannot stop instantly, and similarly the current 
through tube No. 1 and the transformer winding CD cannot build up 
instantly. Therefore, for a finite period, known as the commutation time, 
both tubes are conducting. Since point C of Fig. 13 is now positive and 
point E is negative, tube No. 1 continues to conduct and tube No. 2 ceases 
to conduct. The voltage from F to D across the inductance and the generator 
is as shown in Fig. 14e. It is the sum of the rectified alternating voltage 
and the direct voltage. 



22 



IS : 10071 - 1981 



1 2 3 




v_ 



/ 1v 



VOLTAGE OF C WITH RESPECT TO D 

■VOLTAGE OF E WITH RESPECT TO D 
COMMUTATION TIME 



bi m m 



CURRENT IN TUBE No. 1 



C ).„ 1| If^l |P^j CURRENT IN TUBE No. 2 

d) IT ^Jl JC3J J CURRENT IN PRIMARY OF TRANSFORMER 



ikklMM 



VOLTAGE OF F WITH RESPECT TO 



o I I I I II 11 It 

9)— IMMMU 





VOLTAGE OF G WITH RESPECT TO 

REACTOR VOLTAGE G WITH RESPECT TO F 
FORWARD VOLTAGE TUBE No. 2 



INVERSE VOLTAGE TUBE No.2 
■TIMEv AVAILABLE FOR OEIONIZATION 
[OBSERVED WITH OSCILLOGRAPH) 

GRID VOLTAGE TUBE No.l 



BIAS VOLTAGE OF H WITH RESPECT TO F 
GRID VOLTAGE TUBE No.2 



Fig. 14 Typical Waveforms Appearing in the Inverter 
Circuit for Measuring Recovery Time 



23 



IS : 10071 - 1981 

4.8.3.5 The voltage of the anode with respect to the cathode of tube 
No. 2, shown in Fig. 14h is then the voltage of £ with respect to D minus 
the voltage of F with respect to D. The method of adjustment of this circuit 
is as follows: 

a) The dc bias is set at the value stated for the measurement. 

b) With the dc generator disconnected from the inverter, the dc 
generator voltage is set to a low value compared with its 
operating value. 

c) The alternating voltage is adjusted until the stated forward peak 
voltage is obtained. 

d) The phase shifter is adjusted to ignite the tubes somewhat in 
advance of the desired phase. 

e) Generators are connected to the circuit and the alternating 
voltage is raised until the tubes start to conduct an appreciable 
current. 

f) The dc generator voltage and phase of ignition together are 
adjusted to obtain the desired average tube current. ( Ignition 
later in the cycle or raising the anode current will change the 
inverse voltage and require adjustment of the generator 
voltage. ) 

g) The procedure is continued for the stated time and failures noted 
to commutate. 

h) The measurement is repeated for longer or shorter times of nega- 
tive anode voltage until a duration of negative anode voltage 
is established for the stated number of recovery failures per 
unit time. 

4.8.3.6 The inverse and forward voltages on the tubes depend on the 
alternating voltage. The average amount of current flowing is a function 
of the direct voltage and of the angle of lag of the grid voltage at a given 
alternating anode voltage. When a tube re-ingites within the available 
time, the direct current rises to a high value. A circuit-breaker must there- 
fore be provided in the dc circuit to protect the tubes. A choke should 
be used to smooth the current in case of re-ignition and to decrease the 
rate-of-rise of direct current on recovery failure, and thus to prevent the 
direct current from increasing sufficiently to damage the tubes within the 
operating time of the circuit-breaker. Commutation failure may result 
from failure of arc initiation in one of the tubes. The triggering grid voltage 
should therefore be made sufficiently positive for an adequate time to 
ensure reliable initiation of the arc. 

24 



IS : 10071 - 1981 

4.9 Thyratron Ionization Time 

4.9.1 With the filament or heater voltage at the desired value and the 
tube temperature adjusted to a value within the desired range, a voltage, 
either direct or alternating, is applied to the anode through a resistance 
of specific value. With the grid biased to a voltage substantially more 
negative ( or less positive ) than the critical grid voltage, an essentially 
rectangular voltage pulse of variable duration is applied in the grid circuit. 
The pulse should be of such value that the resultant grid voltage is less 
negative ( or more positive } than the critical grid voltage by a specified 
amount and, when alternating anode voltage is used, should occur at the 
peak of the anode voltage wave. Conduction should take place within the 
time of the pulse duration, as indicated by a cathode-ray oscillograph. 
The minimum pulse duration when conduction takes place is the measure- 
ment result. 

PRECAUTION — The time of rise of the applied pulse should 
be short compared with the ionization time to be measured. 



25 



