**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 101-1-4 (1987): Methods of sampling and test for paints, 
varnishes and related products. Part 1: Test on liquid 
paints (general and physical). Section 4: Brushing test 
[CHD 20: Paints, Varnishes and Related Products] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iimmK-^i^^^ T ^bi^ nvF^f 



::^^s^\n%i9^j^/;s^>^^^^ 



K^^^i^Vii^^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 667-61 2-62/'63 



IS: 101 { Part 1/Sec 4 ) ^ 1987 



Indian Standard 



( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 



METHODS OF SAMPLING AND TEST FOR 
PAINTS, VARNISHES AND RELATED PRODUCTS 

PART I TESTS ON LIQUID PAINTS (GENERAL AND PHYSICAL) 

Section 4 Brushing Test 

( Third Revision ) 



1. Scope— Prescribes procedures for assessing the brushing and flow characteristics of paints and 
related materials when applied to relatively large areas of closely defined substrates. It can also be 
used to observe other properties like the tendency of the paint to retract from sharp edges and 
protrusions with consequent loss of opacity and protective power. 

1.1 This test does not allow the determination of paint properties in any absolute or precise sense 
because of the subjective factor involved in evaluating results. Nevertheless when carried out by a 
skilled operator, and especially when used to compare the performance of a product under test of an 
agreed standard material, it has been found to give very useful information that is not attainable in any 
other way. 

2. Selection of Panel for Test — The substrate material should be chosen in accord with the type 
of material under test and its proposed usage. Thus solvent-borne finishing paints and undercoats 
should be tested on filled plywood panels, filled or primed asbestos cement board or primed metal 
panels; wood primers on unfilled plywood panels, and water-borne paints on plasterboard, asbestos 
cement board, hard board or for some purposes, on unfilled plywood panels. The system used shall be 
that normally employed in practice, if there is any special substrate on which the material is to be 
used in practice or any special preparation of the substrate, when the panel used for the test should be 
chosen and prepared in accordance with these requirements as agreed to between the buyer and the 
seller. 

3. Preparation of Panels 

3.1 Wood Paneis—Plyv^ood {see 13:303-1975 Specification for plywood for general purposes) of 
size 1 mx 1 mx10 mm. 

3.1.1 /Woi//c^/V?5rs — When it is desired to include a moulding, it is preferable to use a rectangular 
rather than a square panel. Two strips of mouldings (see Fig. 1A) shall be mitred at 45° at one end and 
fitted together as shown in Fig. 2 and 3. 



PANEL 
PIN 




(A) 



GLUE LINE 
(B) 



All dimensions In millimetres. 
FIG. 1 SECTION OFMOULDINGS 



AdoptedSO April 1987 



© December 1987, BIS 



Gr 3 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 101 ( Part 1/Sec4)- 1987 



TOP OF PANEL 




MOULDING 



MASKING 
TAPE 



-MOULDING 



PRIMER 
MASKING TAPE 

^UNDERCOAT OVER PRIMER 



-UNDERCOAT PLUS FINISHING 
COAT OVER PRIMER 



INDICATES DIRECTION OF LAYING OFF 
FIG. 2 ARRANGEMENT OF PANEL AND DIRECTIONS OF LAYING OFF 



If the mouldings as shown in Fig 1A is not obtainable, it is permitted to nail, glue together two 
strips of half mouldings as shown in Fig. 1B. The strips of moulding should be fixed to the panel by 
nailing or glueing so that they are 150 mm from, and parallel to the edges of the panel. Other mouldings 
may be used as agreed to between the buyer and the seller. 

3.1.2 Rub down the face of the panel and the moulding, if any, with glass paper known as Grade No. 
until a smooth surface is obtained, tal<ing care not to round the sharp edges of the moulding. If the 
panel is required for testing an undercoat or finish only, it is permitted to fill it by applying a suitable 
high build surface to the front of the panel and the moulding. After allowing this to dry for at least 
24 h, the panel should be rubbed down with Grade No. glass paper until a smooth surface is obtained. 



3.1.3 For testing of paints other than primers, panels used for earlier tests may be reused, provided 
the surface has been wet abraded with a good quality waterproof silicon carbide paper, with an 
abrasive grain size corresponding to that known as 220 silicon carbide grit, until the gloss of the 
previous test paint has been entirely removed and smooth surface free from brushmarks has been 
obtained and, if necessary, a coat of suitable undercoat has been applied over the flatted surface and 
allowed to dry for 24 h, than wet abraded as above. Comparison of paints should be carried out only 
on similarly treated surfaces. Where recovered panels have mouldings, these should be renewed, if 
the sharp edges have become rounded. When coated plywood panels are to be wet abraded, it is a 
useful precaution to coat the back and edges of the panel with one or more coats of a suitable paint to 
prevent water entering the panel and causing the ply to lift. 



IS: 101 ( Part 1/Sec4)- 1987 



TOP OF PANEL 




undercoat! 

PLUS 

FINISHING 
COAT OVER 
SUBSTRATE -J 

UNDERCOAT PLUS 
FINISHING COAT 
OVER MOULDING 
COATED WITH UNDER- 
COAT OF AGREED COLOUR 

UNDERCOAT PLUS FINISHING 
COAT OVER SUBSTRATE 



-MASKING 
TAPE 



INDICATES DIRECTION OF 



SUBSTRATE 
(PRERARED 
SURFACE-WHITE) 

MASKING TAPE 

UNDERCOAT OVER . 
SUBSTRATE 

UNDERCOAT OVER UNDER- 
COAT OF AGREED COLOUR 

MASKING TAPE 
UNDERCOAT PLUS FINISHING COAT 
OVER UNDERCOAT OF AGREED 
COLOUR 
LAYING OFF 



FIG. 3 ARRANGEMENT OF PANEL AND DIRECTIONS OF LAYING OFF 



3.2 Steel Pane/s — Sieel panels of size 1-0 m x 1-0 m x 1-25 mm as specified in IS:101 (Part 1/ 
Sec 3)-1985 'Methods of sampling and test for paints, varnishes and related products: Part 1 Tests on 
liquid paints ( general and physical ). Sec 3 Preparation of panels*. 

3.2.1 If steel panels used earlier are to be reused, the entire paint coating may be removed using a 
suitable paint remover and the panel prepared as prescribed in 3.2. 

3.3 Plastered Board Panels ~-Goo6 quality gypsum plasterboard not less than 1-0 m x 1-0 m x9 mm 
in dimensions. The face used for painting is the face designed to receive decoration directly. No initial 
preparation is needed before painting. 



3.4 Hard Board Panels — Oi size 1-0 mm x 1/0 m x 5 mm. 
one. No initial preparation Is needed before painting. 



The face used for painting is the smooth 



3.5 Asbestos-Cement Soarf/— Double-processed asbestos-cement board may be used and requires no 
initial preparation before painting. 

4. Sampling — A representative sample of the product uader test shall be obtained as prescribed in 
IS: 101 ( Part 1/Sec 1 )-1981 'Methods of sampling and test for paints, varnishes and related products: 
Part 1 Tests on liquid paints ( general and physical ), Sec 1 Sampling ( third revision )'. 



IS: 101 ( Part 1/Sec4)^ 1987 
5. Proci3dure for Painting 

5.1 Wherever possible, a paint of similar type to the paint under test shall be agreed between the 
buyer and the seller as an approved sample for comparison purposes. The approved sample shallbe 
applied first before the test paint or seriesof paints to similarly prepared panels. All paints shall be 
applied as full coat using similar procedure and sjmilar brushes, 

5.2 Solvent-borne Paints 

5.2.1 Testing single paints 

5.2.1.1 Primers --Prmers shall be tested on appropriate panels prepared in accordance with 3. 
One panel shall be prepared for each primer under test and one panel similarly for the approved 
sample. Place the panel In a near vertical position with the larger dimensions upright when appropriate. 
Remove any dust from the surface with a soft lint-free cloth or tack rag. Apply the approved sample to 
the test surface as described In 5.1 using appropriate brushes. Lay off In the direction as shown in 
Fig 2. Repeat the procedure with each primer under test, using clean brushes Identical In type and 
size with those used for the approved sample. Note any difference in application properties. Allow the 
primers to dry for 24 h, unless otherwise specified, with the panels in vertical position. Examine the 
primer on the panels and mouldings, if any, and compare the primer under test with the approved 
sample for freedom from brush marks, sagging and flowing away from the edges of the moulding and 
for any other defects. 

5.2.1.2 Undercoats — Un^QXCoaXs shall be tested over a primer on plywood, steel panels or 
asbestos-cement panels prepared as described in 3 and 5.2.1.1 or on filled or recovered plywood or 
steel panels. Wet abrade each primer, using a good quality waterproof silicon carbide paper with an 
abrasive grain size corresponding to that known as 220 silicon carbide grit, until similarly smooth 
surfaces free from brush marking or other defects are obtained. Wash the panels thoroughly with clean 
water, remove surplus water with a soft lint-free cloth or a sponge and wash leather; and unless other- 
wise specified, allow the panels to dry for not less than 24 h and not more than 48 h before use. 
Prepare one panel for each undercoat under test and one panel similarly for the approved sample for 
comparison. On each panel leave unpainted or preferably mark off an area approximately 300 mm x 
300 mm at the bottom corner remote from the mouldings, if any. Apply the approved sample and test 
sample to separate panels as described in 5.2.1.1. Note any difference in application properties of the 
undercoat. Allow to dry for not less than 24 h and then remove the marking. Examine the undercoats 
in the panels and mouldings, if any, and compare the test sample with approved sample for freedom 
from brush marking, sagging and flowing away from the edges of the moulding and for any other 
defects. 

Note — The object of marking a portion of the panels is to provide a check, when assessnnent Is carried out, that the 
substrates on which the paints are applied are comparable. 

5.2.1.3 Finishing pa/V?f5 — Finishing paints shall be tested on panels prepared as described 
in 5.2.1.2 except that the primer shall be completely covered using an undercoat as agreed to between 
the buyer and the seller. Before application of the finishing coat, wet abrade the plain areas of the 
panels In the same manner as described for primers In 5.2.1.2, except that the silicon carbide paper 
used for flatting should not have an abrasive grit size coarser than 280 grafde. On each panel leave 
unpainted or preferably mark off 300 mm x 300 mm of the undercoat in the manner described in 5.2.1.2. 
Apply the approved sample of finishing paint and the test sample to separate panels In the manner 
described in 5.2.1.2. Note any difference in application properties of the pjaints. After allowing the 
paints to dry for 24 h, or such other period as may be specified, with the panels in vertical position, 
remove the marks and compare the finishing paint under test with the approved sample for freedom 
from brush marking, sagging, flowing away from the edges of the moulding, wrinkling, floating and any 
other defects. While finishing coats shall be treated as finishing system in accordance with 5.2.2. 

5.2.2 Testing painting systems — Each coat of a paint system shall be applied in accordance with 
procedure laid down in 5.2.1, comparison of application properties being made between the paint under 
test and the approved sample at each stage where the wet abrading processes between coats are not 
carried out In practice, omit these processes in carrying out this test. When wet abrasion is not 
carried out, lightly divide the plain areas of the panel 24 h after the application of the undercoat using 
dry silicon carbide paper 400 grade. Then wipe over the panel with a soft lint-free cloth or tack rag. 

5.2.2.1 When a paint systems comprising primer, undercoat and finish including white paints are to 
be tested, an area approximately 300 mm x 300 mm of the primer shall be marked off as in 5.2.1.2 and 
an area approximately 300 mm x 300 mm' of the undercoat shall be marked off along the lower edge of 
the panel adjacent to the marked off primer. 



IS : 101 ( Part 1/Sec 4 ) - 1987 

5.2.2,2 When white paint system of undercoat and. finish are to be tested, the surfacer used in the 
preparation of new panels or recovered panels shall also be white. 

On each panel, mark off an area of approximately 005 m 2 in the form of a rectangle 300 mm in 
height and 150 mm in width at the bottom corner of the panel remote from the mouldings to provide the 
necessary contrast before the application of the undercoats, coat all of the moulding except for a 
300 mm length and a patch approximately 300x300 mm, situated at the bottom of the panel with 
the outer edge parallel to and 300 mm from the right hand edge of each panel, with suitable, undercoat, 
to simulate the colour of an agreed priming paint. After 24 h air drying, this coloured patch may, 
if necessary, be wet abraded using silicon carbide paper with an abrasive grit size not coarser 
than 280 grade, in order to remove excessive brush marks and then allowed to dry. Apply the 
undercoat and finishing coat according to 5.2.1.2 and 5.2.1.3 except that the area of undercoat to be 
marked off shall be 0-1 m^ iat the bottom of the panel adjoining the marked off portion of the substrate 
in the form of a square. In the assessment of the white systems, particular attention shall be paid 
to the opacity of the undercoat and the system when viewed either over the primer or the coloured 
patch as appropriate. The flowing away of white paints from the edges of the moulding can be more 
easily observed over a coloured moulding. 

5.3 Water Borne Pamts — The material shall be thinned in accordance with manufacturers' instructions 
and tested on unfilled plywood, plasterboard, hard board or asbestos-cement board panels, prepared as 
described In 3. Place one of the panels firmly in a near vertical position using an appropriate brush, 
coat the panel with a normal sealing coat of the approved sample paint. Repeat the procedure on a 
similarly prepared panel with paint under test; noting any difference in application properties. With 
panels in vertical position allow the paint to dry for 24 h or such other period as may be specified. At 
the end of this period, mark approximately 300x300 mm on each panel and using an appropriate brush 
apply a second coat of the respective paints, making no attempt to lay off in one direction. Note 
any differences in application properties. With the panels In vertical position, allow the second coat to 
dry for 24 hours or such other periods as may be specified. Remove the masks from the panels 
at the end of this period. Compare the panels, with the sealing coats and the finishing coats for brush 
marks, sagging, cissing and any other defects. 

6. Test Report — The test report shall include the following: 

a) A reference to this standard; 

b) Type and identification of the product under test; 

c) Type of brush used; 

d) Date; and 

e) Observations made. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This is one of a series of standards dealing with the sampling and a testing of paints, varnishes 
and related products. This standard supersedes 6.2 of 13:101-1964 'Methods of test for RMP and 
enamels (second revision )\ In the preparation of this standard considerable assistance has been 
derived from ISO TR 3172 Paints and varnishes — Large scale brushing test, issued by International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO). 



Printed at Britannia Calendar Mfg Co, Calcutta, India 



