**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10082 (1981) : Method of test for the determination of 
tensile strength by indirect tests on rock specimens [CED 
48: Rock Mechanics] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



(Reaffirmed 2001) 

Indian Standard 

METHOD OF TEST FOR 

DETERMINATION OF TENSILE STRENGTH 

BY INDIRECT TESTS ON ROCK SPECIMENS 



UDC 6912 J 620172 




^ Copyrighi 1982 

INDTAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK. BllAVAN. 9 liAllADUR SHAH ZAFAR MAUG 
NEW IlKUIl 1JMQ2 



fjT 3 



j^QbtmbsT lyB:^ 



IS : 10082 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

METHOD OF TEST FOR 
DETERMINATION OF TENSILE STRENGTH 
BY INDIRECT TESTS ON ROCK SPECIMENS 

Soil Engineering and Rock Mechanics Sectional CommitteCj BDC 23 

Chairman Representing 

Dr Jagdish Narain University of Roorkee, Roorkee 

Members 
Additional Director Research Ministry of Railways 
(F. E. ),RDSO 
Deputy Director Research 

( Soil Mech ), RDSO ( Alternate ) 
Shri p. D. Agarwal Public Works Department, Government of Uttar 

Pradesh, Lucknow 
Dr B. L. Dhawan ( Alternate ) 
Prof Alam Singh University of Jodhpur, Jodhpur 

Col Avtar Singh Engineer-in-Chief 's Branch, Army Headquarters 

Lt-Col V. K. Kanitkar ( Alternate ) 
Chief Engineer ( D & R ) Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab, 

Chandigarh 
Dr G. S. Dhillon ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. G. Dandavate The Concrete Association of India, Bombay 

Shri N, G. Duggal ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. G. Dastidar In personal capacity ( 5 Hungerford Street, 12/1, 

Hungerford Cottrt, Calcutta 700 017 ) 
Dr G, S. Dhillon Indian Geotechnical Society, New Delhi 

Director, IRI Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh, 

Roorkee 
Shri A. H. Divanji Asia Foundations and Construction ( P ) Ltd, 

Bombay 
Shri A. N. Jangle ( Alternate ) 
Dr Gopal Rajan Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta 

Dr Gopal Ranjan University of Roorkee, Roorkee 

Shri S. Gupta Gemindia Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri N. V. De-Sousa ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. S. Jain G. S. Jain & Associates, Roorkee 

Shri Vijay K. Jain ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. B. Joshi Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Deputy Director ( CSMRS ) ( Alternate ) 
CoL M. V. Kayerkar Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shri V. B. Ghorpade ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10082 -1981 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri O. p. Malhotra Public Works Department, Chandigarh Administra- 

tioRj Chandigarh 
Shri D. R. Narahari Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), 

Roorkee 
Shri B. G. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Skri T. K. Natarajan Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 

Dr G. B. Rao Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 

Dr K. K. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Research Officer ( B & RRL ) Public Works Department, Government of Punjab, 

Chandigarh 
Shri K. R. Saxena Engineering Research Laboratories, Government 

of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad 
Secretary Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi 

Deputy Secretary ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Sivaguru Roads Wing ( Ministry of Shipping & Transport ) 

Shri D. V. Sikka ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. S. Srinivasan National Buildings Organization, New Delhi 

Shri Sunil Berry ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Subramanyam Karnataka Engineering Research Station, Krishna- 

raj asagar 
Superintending Engineer ( P&DG ) Public Works Department, Government of Tamil 

Nadu, Madras 
Executive Engineer ( SMRD ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. Raman, Director General, ISI ( Ex~oJficio Member ) 

Director ( Civ Engg ) 

Secretary 

Shri K. M. Mathur 

Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI 

Rock Mechanics Subcommittee^ BDC 23 : 5 

Convener 
Dr B. Singh Central Mining Research Station, Dhanbad 

Members 

Shri A. K. Dube ( AUemaie to 
Dr B. Singh ) 
Shri Amar Singh Central Building Research Institute, Roorkcc 

Shri Chandra PrakasJtI ( Alternate ) 
Prof Bhawani Singh University of Roorkee, Roorkee 

Director ( CSMRS ) Ministry of Irrigation 

Director ( CW & PRS ) Central Water & Power Research Station, Pune 

Shri S.L. Mokashi ( Alternate ) 
Prof B. K, Kaul Kurukshtera University, Kurukshetra 

Shri M. D. Nair Associated Instrument Mfrs ( India ) Private Limited, 

New Delhi 

Prof T. S. Nagaraj ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. L. Narula Geological Survey of India, Calcutta 

Dr T. Ramamurthi Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 

Dr Y. V. Ramana National Geophysical Research Institute, Hyderabad 

Research Officer, SRPD ( MERI ) Irrigation Department, Bombay 
Secretary ( CBIP ) Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi 

Deputy Secretary, CBIP ( Alternate ) 



IS : 10082 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

METHOD OF TEST FOR 
DETERMINATION OF TENSILE STRENGTH 
BY INDIRECT TESTS ON ROCK SPECIMENS 

0, FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 24 December 1981, after the draft finalized by the Soil Engineering 
and Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Civil Engineering Division Council. 

0.2 In order to assess the various properties of rock, Indian Standards 
covering standard method of tests are being formulated and this standard 
covers methods of tests for tensile strength. Because of difficulties in con- 
ducting a direct uniaxial tensile strength test, methods of indirect deter- 
mination of tensile strength of rocks have become popular. Several such 
indirect methods are available. Brazilian test, though strictly not uniaxial 
in nature, has become quite widely known because the values obtained 
are comparable with those of direct tests. Ring test has come into vogue 
in order to initiate fracture from the centre of the specimen, which may 
be not so in some rocks and is also considered to be more appropriate from 
fracture mechanics view-point. While these two tests are conducted on 
cylindrical rock specimens, the line load test is used for testing rock prisms. 
The point load test may also be used for testing rock prisms and is also 
considered to be reliable. In a given project, it is preferable to use only 
one of these methods for evaluation of tensile strength, as it is highly de- 
pendent of the type of test, as well as the size of the specimen. 

0,3 In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this standard, 
if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be 
done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 



1. SCOPE 

!•! This standard covers the methods for the determination of tensile 
strength of rocks by indirect tests on rock specimens, namely, Brazilian 
Test, Ring Test, Point Load Test and Line Load Test. 



*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ) . 

3 



IS : 10082 - 1981 

1.2 The tests may be carried out either in the laboratory or at the drilling 
site. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 

2.1 Core — It is any single solid cylindrical piece of rock obtained from 
drilling process. 

2.2 Disc — It is any single circular solid piece cut out of the rock core. 

2.3 Ring — It is any single circular solid piece cut out of the rock core 
which has a central hole of specified radius. 

2.4 Rock-Prism — It is any single solid prism of rock cut out of rock. 

2.5 Tensile Strength — It is the maximum tensile stress at failure. 
However, it is not unique characteristic of a brittle material and is dependent 
upon the type of test and the size of specimen. 

3, PREPARATION OF SAMPLES 

3.1 The specimen shall be selected to represent a true average of the type 
of rock under consideration and shall be prepared as per IS : 9179-1979*. 

3.2 In the laboratory, the rock specimens shall be obtained from the same 
block of rock as on site and drilled in the same direction. 

3.3 In the field, the rock specimen shall be obtained from the same bore 
hole, and geological horizon and within the shortest possible difference 
in their elevations in the bore holes. 

3.4 The diameter of the disc and ring specimens for the Brazilian Test 
and Ring Test respectively, shall not be less than 45 mm and thickness 
shall be approximately equal to half the diameter. 

3.5 The inner radius of the ring in the ring test shall be approximately 
one tenth of the outer radius, 

3.6 The hole in a core for the ring test shall be made by drilling on a lathe 
machine. Then the core shall be cut showly and carefully by a diamond 
saw to the required thickness. 



♦Method for preparation of rock specimen for laboratory testing. 

4 



IS : 10082 - 1981 

3 J The side of the square rock-prism to be used in the line load test shall 
not be less than 50 mm. The thickness of square prism should be about 
two-third of the side of the square base. 

3.8 The diameter of the cores for point load test shall not be more than 
35 mm and not less than 12 mm. The length of core shall be more than 
its diameter. For the point load test on rock-prism the length shall be greater 
than its width. The irregular shaped specimen shall be roughly egg shaped 
with the ratio of largest to shortest diameter of about 1*5:1 and volume 
of about 100 cm^ obtained by breaking lumps of rock. The difference in 
mass of different specimens should be less than 2 percent. 

3.9 The total number of specimens should be such that at least 10 tests 
of any one of the types under consideration are possible. 

3.10 The specimens may be air dried in open air for 15 to 20 days after 
their preparation and then tested. If the test is to be performed on saturated 
rock, the specimens should be saturated carefully before performing the 
tests. 

3.11 The dimensions of the test specimens shall be measured to the nearest 
• 1 mm. The thickness of the disc, ring or prism shall be measured at or 
near the centre. 

4. BRAZILIAN TEST 
4.1 Apparatus 

4.1.1 Two steel loading jaws designed so as to contact a disc shaped 
rock samples at diametrically opposed surfaces over an arc of contact of 
about lO'' at failure ( see Fig. 1 ). The critical dimensions of the apparatus 
are the radius of curvature of the jaws, the clearance and length of the 
guide pins coupling the two curved jaws and the width of the jaws. Radius 
of jaws shall be 1*5 times specimen radius. Guide pin clearance shall be 
such as to permit rotation of one jaw relative to the other by 4 x 10'^ radians 
out of plane of the apparatus {25 mm penetration of guide pin with 0* 1 mm 
clearance ). The width of jaws shall be 1 * 1 times the specimen thickness. 
The remaining dimensions shall be as scaled from Fig. 1 . The upper jaw 
contains a spherical seating conveniently formed by a 25 mm diameter 
half ball bearing. 

4.1.2 Double thickness ( 0*2 to 0*4 mm ) adhesive paper strip ( masking 
tap ) with a width equal to or slightly greater than the specimen thickness. 

4.1.3 A suitable machine for applying and measuring compressive 
loads to the specimens. It shall be of sufficient capacity and be capable 
of applying loads at a rate conforming to the requirement set out. 



IS : 10082 - 1981 



HALF BALL 
BEARING 



UPPER JAW 




HOLE WITH 
CLEARANCE 
ON DOWEL 



GUIDE 

PIN 



LOWER 
JAW 



-TEST SPECIMEN 
Fig. 1 Apparatus for Brazilian Test 




4.1.4 A spherical seat, if any, of the testing machine shall be placed 
in a locked position, the two loading surfaces of the machine being parallel 
to each other. 

4.1.5 It is preferable but not obligatory that the testing machine be 
fitted with a chart recorder to record load against displacement to aid in 
the measurement of failure load. 

4.2 Testing Procedure 

4.2.1 The test specimen shall be wrapped around its periphery with 
one layer of the adhesive paper tape and mounted squarely in the test 
apparatus such that the curved platens load the specimen diametrically 
with the axes of rotation for specimen and apparatus coincident. 

4*2.2 Load on the specimen shall be applied continuously at a constant 
rate such that failure in the weakest rocks occurs within 15 to 30 seconds. 
A loading rate of 200 N/s is recommended. 

4.2.3 The maximum load on the specimen shall be recorded in Newtons 
with one percent accuracy. 



IS : 10082 - 1981 

4,2*4 Where the testing machine is fitted with a force/displacement 
recorder, a record should be taken during testing so that the load for 
primary fracture can be precisely determined ( in some cases load continues 
to increase after primary failure as the split specimen is still bearing load ). 
If a load/displacement recorder is not available on the testing machine, 
care shall be taken by the operator to detect the load at primary failure. 
At primary failure, there shall be a brief pause in the motion of the indicator 
needle. However, the difference between the load of primary failure and 
ultimate load bearing capacity is at the most only 5 percent. 

4.3 Mode of Failure 

4.3,1 The correct mode of failure is vertical splitting starting from the 
centre towards loading points. This failure mode is an indication of a 
successful test [see Fig, 2). 





OESlf^ABlE MODE OF FAILURE UNOESmABlE MODE OF FA)LU»E 
2 A SRAZtLIAh) TEST 





IP Pi 

DESIRABLE MOOE OF FAILURE UNDESIRABLE MODE OF FAtLWf 

2 6 RING TEST 
Fig. 2 Modes of Failure 



IS : 10082 -1981 

4.3.2 In a few cases, failure may initiate from loading points, with 
formation of wedges {see Fig. 2). This undesirable mode of failure may 
be due to lack of load distribution on lO"" arc. In such cases, instead of 
Brazilian test, a ring test may be performed. 

4*4 Calculation 

4.4.1 Tensile strength of rock shall be calculated from the following 
expression provided the mode of failure is as indicated in 4.3.1. 

^'-^ ^^) 

where 

qt = Tensile strength in MN/m^, 
P = Load at failure in Newtons, 
D = Diameter of test specimen in mm, and 
t = Thickness of test specimen measured at the centre in mm. 



5. RING TEST 

5.1 Apparatus and Procedure 

5.1.1 The apparatus shall be the same as for the Brazilian Test ( see 4.1 ). 

5.1.2 The procedure as given in 4.2 shall be followed. 

5.2 Mode of Failure 

5.2.1 The ring test is considered to have ideal condition from fracture 
mechanics consideration. 

5.2.2 The chances of vertical splitting increase considerably in the 
ring test because the central hole acts as a stress raiser. The cracks initiate 
from top and bottom of the hole and propagate towards loading points 
( see Fig. 2 ) . 

5.2.3 In a few cases, fractures may initiate from loading points. In such 
cases, the diameter of the hole should be increased slightly so that the hole 
acts effectively as a stress raiser. 

5.3 Calculation 

5.3.1 The tensile strength of rock shall be calculated from the following 
expression if the mode of failure is as indicated in 5.2.2. 

8 



IS : 10082 - 1981 

== 2iP[^ + 38(Do/JP)^] 

where ^D\ *i)o' are outer and inner diameters of ring in mm, and 
^t, P, t are same as specified in 4.4.1- 

6. LINE LOAD TEST 

6.1 Apparatus 

6.1.1 The apparatus shall have two flat loading platens with sufficient 
loading capacity. 

6.1.2 Packings of steel bar of square cross-section, 12 mm side and a 
double layer of adhesive paper tape shall be used at top and bottom. The 
packings shall be of width equal to one-twelfth of the side of a square- 
prism. 

6.1.3 The line load test is suited to test rock-prism of building materials. 

6.2 Testing Procedure 

6.2.1 The square prism shall be laid horizontally, the thickness shall 
be parallel to the loading platens ( see Fig. 3 ). 




Fig. 3 Point Load Test on Rock-Prism 

6.2.2 The load on the specimen shall be applied continuously at a constant 
rate of about 200 N/s. The maximum load shall be recorded with one 
percent accuracy. 



IS : 10082 - 1981 

6,3 Calculation 

6.3.1 The tensile strength of rock shall be calculated from the following 
expression ( see Fig. 4 ) . 



TOTAL 
LOAD 




STEEL PACKING 
OVER DOUBLE LAYER 
OF ADHESIVE PAPER 
STRIP 



EFFECTIVE 
AREA 



Fig. 4 Line Load Test on Rock-Prism 



a) For the case where specimen is supported on packing of steel bar 
0-98x2P 



qt = 



rD't 



b) For the case where the specimen rests directly on the lower platen 
P 

7TU t 

where D' is the side of square base in mm, and qt, P and ' / ' are 
same as specified in 4.4. 

7. POINT LOAD TEST 

7.1 Apparatus 

7.1.1 The apparatus used for point load test is given in IS : 8764-1978*. 

7.1.2 The point load test is the only test suitable for field testing of 
cores because there is no need of cutting or finishing the ends of the core. 



♦Method for determination of point load stroagth index of rocks. 

10 



IS : 10082 - 1981 
7.2 Test Procedure 

7,2.1 The testing procedure is same as given in 18:8764-1978*. 

73 Calculation 

a) The tensile strength of the rock cores shall be calculated from the 
following expression: 

qt =0-96P/Z)2 

b) The tensile strength of rock prisms shall be obtained from the 

following expression: 

0-70 P 

c) The tensile strength of irregular shaped specimens shall be obtained 

by either of the following equations : 



P 9P 

where 



D = Distance between the loading points in mm; 

V = volume of specimen in mm^; 

W = width of the specimen (lesser of the base dimension ) 
in mm\ and qt P are same as specified in 4.4.1. 

8. REPORTING OF TEST RESULTS 

8.1 The report of tests shall include the following information: 

a) Lithologic description of the rock; 

b) Orientation of the axis of loading with respect to specimens aniso- 
trophy, for example, bedding planes, foliations, etc; 

c) Source of sample, including geographic location, depth and orienta- 
tion, dates and method of sampling and storage history and 
environment ; 

d) Type of indirect tensile strength test; 

e) Number of specimens tested; 



♦Method for determination of point load strength index of rocks. 

11 



IS : 10082 - 1981 

f) Specimen diameter and height; 

g) Water content and degree of saturation at the time of test; 
h) Test duration and stress rate; 

j ) Date of testing and type of testing machine ; 

k) Mode of failure ; and 

m) Any other observations or available physical data such as specific 
gravity, porosity and permeability citing the method of deter- 
mination for each. 

8.2 The tensile strength for each specimen in the sample, expressed to 
three significant decimal places together with the average result for the 
same. 



12 



