**************** 



*■ *Z**K 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 

Jawaharlal Nehru 
Step Out From the Old to the New 



mrjsssss^^w: 




,_A» 




**************** 



BLANK PAGE 



<_<ii££ 





UJ> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 10027: 2000 

W tcf> ftcrxfr eft ^TO fcFT^ff 3ft^ 

650 cfr TJ ^ft >ft cFI c|Wdl cfr feH? ^T: 

( Wen <p7#OT ) 



Indian Standard 

COMPOSITE UNITS OF AIR-BREAK SWITCHES 

AND REWIRABLE TYPE FUSES FOR VOLTAGES 

NOT EXCEEDING 650 V a.c. — SPECIFICATION 

( First Revision ) 



ICS 29.120.40; 29.120.50 



<D BIS 2000 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

April 2000 Price Group 10 



Low Voltage Switchgear and Controlgear Sectional Committee, ET 07 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Low Voltage Switchgear and Controlgear Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical 
Division Council. 

The majority of the switches being manufactured in India are metal-clad switches. Switches with insulated enclosures 
are also available in large quantities. These switches and fuse combination units, incorporating particularly rewirable 
type fuses are being manufactured in the small scale sector, intended for domestic and similar installations. 

This standard has, therefore, been brought out primarily to meet the requirements of the manufacturer and the users 
in respect of rewirable type switch-fuse units for current ratings not exceeding 100 A and of duty categories 
AC-21AandAC-21fi. 

IS 13947 (Part3): 1993 ' Specification for low-voltage switchgear and controlgear : Part 3 Switches, disconnectors 
and fuse combination units' has been published superseding IS 4064 (Part 1 and Part 2). It is, however, felt that 
while revising IS 10027 incorporating requirements contained in IS 13947 (Part 3), need for exclusively separate 
standard is maintained in view of composite units and rewirable type fuses manufactured in small scale sector 
intended for domestic and similar installations. 

In the use of this standard, references shall have to be made to IS 2086 : 1993 'Specification for carriers and bases 
used in rewirable type electric fuses for voltage up to 650 V (third revision)' . 

The object of this standard is to define: 

a) The characteristics of the equipment; 

b) The conditions with which the equipment shall comply with reference to: 

1 ) operation and behaviour in normal service; 

2) operation and behaviour in case of specified abnormal conditions, for example, short-circuit; 

3) dielectric properties; 

c) The tests intended for confirming that these conditions have been met and the methods to be adopted for 
these tests; and 

d) The data to be marked on the equipment. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for 
rounding off numerical values {revised?. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value 
should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS 10027 : 2000 



Indian Standard 

COMPOSITE UNITS OF AIR-BREAK SWITCHES 

AND REWIRABLE TYPE FUSES FOR VOLTAGES 

NOT EXCEEDING 650 V a.c. — SPECIFICATION 

( First Revision ) 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers requirements for composite 
units of air-break switches and rewirable type electric 
fuses with rated current not exceeding 100 A intended 
for system voltages not exceeding 650 V a.c. 

1.2 The switches incorporated in the composite units 
are intended for utilization category of AC-21A 
(frequent operational) and AC-21B (infrequent 
operation). 

1 .3 The rewirable type fuses, incorporated in composite 
units, shall conform to the requirements laid down in 
IS 2086 

NOTE — It shall however be recognized that this imposes no 
restriction on rewirable type fuse-combination of Other 
categories of duties or composite units incorporating cartridge 
type fuses in which case reference shall be made to IS 13947 
(Part 3). 

NOTE — This standard shall cover only composite units 
incorporating : 

a) Air-break 'on' and 'off switches of category AC-21A 
and AC -2 IB and for rated current not exceeding 100A, 

b) Rewirable type of fuses only, and 

c) Enclosure of metal-clad insulated types. 

2 REFERENCES AND DEFINITIONS 

2.0 The Indian Standards listed in Annex D are 
necessary adjuncts to this standard. 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions in addition to those given in IS 1885 
(Part 17) and IS 13947 (Part 1) shall apply. 

2.2 Switch (Mechanical) — A mechanical switching 
device capable of making, carrying and breaking current 
under normal circuit Gonditions which may include 
specified operating overload conditions and also carrying 
for a specified time currents under specified abnormal 
circuit conditions such, as those of short-circuit. 

NOTE — A switch may be capable of making, but not breaking 
short-circuit currents. 

2.3 Fuse-Combination Unit — A combination of a 



mechanical switching device and one or more fuses in a 
composite unit, assembled by the manufacturer or in 
accordance with his instructions. 

2.4 Switch-Fuse — A switch in which one or more 
poles have a fuse in series in a composite unit. 

2.5 Dependent Manual Operation (of a Mechanical 
Switching Device) — An operation solely by means of 
directly applied manual energy such that the speed and 
force of the operation are dependent upon the action of 
the operator. 

2.6 Independent Manual Operation (of a Mechanical 
Switching Device) — A stored energy operator where 
the energy originates from manual power, stored and 
released in one continuous operation, such that the speed 
and force of the operation are independent of the action 
of the operator. 

3 CHARACTERISTICS OF EQUIPMENT 

3.1 Summary of Characteristics 

The characteristics of the equipment shall be stated in 
terms of the following as applicable: 

- Type of equipment (3.2) 

- Rated quantities (see 3.3) 

- Utilization category (3.3.7) 

- Dependent manual operation (see 2.5) 

- Independent manual operation (see 2.6) 

- Degree of protection (see Annex C) 

3.2 Type of Equipment 

The equipment shall have the following details: 

a) Number of Poles — Either single pole with 
neutral, double pole Or triple pole with neutral. 

b) Number of Positions — The equipment shall have 
only two positions, that is 'on' and 'off. 

c) Kind of Current — The equipment shall be 
designed for use in single-phase or three-phase 
a.c. systems of rated frequency of 50 Hz. 



IS 10027 : 2000 



3.3 Rated Quantities 

Rated qualities are assigned as indicated in 3.3.1 
and 3.3.2, but it is not necessary to establish all the rated 
quantities listed. 

3.3.1 Rated Voltages 

An equipment is defined by the following rated voltages. 

NOTE — Certain types of equipment may have more than one 
rated voltage or may have a rated voltage range. 

3.3,1.1 Rated operational voltage (U) 

A rated operational voltage of an equipment is a value 
of voltage which combined with a rated operational 
current, determines the application of the equipment and 
to which the relevant tests and the utilization categories 
are referred. 

For single pole equipment, the rated operational voltage 
is generally stated as the voltage across the pole. 

For multiple equipment, it is generally stated the voltage 
betv/een phases. 

NOTES 

1 For certain devices and particular applications, a different 
method of stating U c may apply; this should be stated in 
the relevant product standard; 

2 For multiple equipment lor use on polyphase circuits, a 
distinction may be made between: 

a) Equipment for use in system where a single fault to 

earth will not cause the full phase to phase voltage to 
appear across a pole (that is unearthed and neutral 
earthed systems); 

b) Equipment for use in system where a single fault to 

earth will cause to full to phase to phase voltage to 
appear across a pole (that is phase earthed systems); 

c) An equipment may he assigned a number of 

combinations of rated operational voltages and rated 
operational currents or powers for different duties and 
utilization categories, 

d) An equipment may be assigned a number of rated 

operational voltages and associated making and braking 
capacities for different duties and utilizations 

categories; and 

e) Attention is drawn to the fact that the operational 

voltages may differ from the working voltages of an 
equipment. 

3.3.1.2 Rated insulation voltage (U.) 

The rated insulation voltage of an equipment is the value 
of voltage to which dielectric tests voltage and creepage 
distances are referred. 



In no case shall the maximum value of rated operational 
voltage exceed that of the rated insulation voltage. 

NOTE — For equipment not having a specified rated insul ation 
voltage, the highest value of the rated operational voltage is 
considered to be the rated insulation voltage. 

3.3.1.3 Rated impulse withstand voltage (U. ) 

The peak value of an impulse voltage of prescribed 
form and polarity which the equipment is capable of 
withstanding without failure under specified conditions 
of test and to which the value of the clearances are 
referred. 

The rated impulse withstand voltage of an equipment 
shall be equal to or higher than the value stated for the 
transient over voltages occurring in the circuit in which 
the equipment is fitted. 

3.3.2 Currents 

An equipment is defined by the following currents. 

3.3.2.1 Conventional free air thermal current (/ ) 

The conventional free air thermal current is the 
maximum value of test current to be used for temperature 
rise tests of unenclosed equipment in free air as given in 
Table 1 . 

The value of the conventional free air thermal current 
shall be at least equal to the maximum value of the rated 
operational current {see 3.3.2.3) of the unenclosed 
equipment. 

Free air is understood to be air under normal conditions 
reasonably free from draughts and external radiation. 



NOTES 
1 The current 
on the equipment. 



is not a rating and is not mandatorily marked 



2 An unenclosed equipment is an equipment supplied by the 
manufacturer without an enclosure or an equipment 
supplied by the manufacturer with an integral enclosure 
which is not normally intended to be the sole equipment 
protective enclosure. 

3.3.2.2 Conventional enclosed thermal current (7 (he ) 

The conventional enclosed thermal current is the value 
of current stated by the manufacturer to be used for the 
temperaturerise tests of the equipment when mounted 
in a specified enclosure. Such tests shall be in 
accordance with 5.3 and are mandatory if the equipment 



IS 10027 : 2000 



Table 1 Temperature Rise Limits 

{Clauses 3.3.2.1, 5.3,7.2.2, and 7.4.6) 



SI 


Type of Material and Description 


Te 


mperature Rise 


No. 


of Part 




Limit 


(!) 


(2) 




(3) 





Contact parts (main and auxiliary contacts): 






a) Copper: 








Uninterrupted duty 




45 k 




b) Silver or silver-faced (see Note 1) 




(see Note 2) 




c) All other metals or sintered metals 




(see Note 3) 


ii) 


Bare conductors 




(see Note 2) 


iii) 


Metallic parts acting as springs 




(see Note 4) 


iv) 


Metallic parts in contact with 
insulating materials 




(see Note 5) 


v) 


Terminals for external insulated 




70 K 




connections 




(see Note 6) 



vi) Manual operating means (handles, levers, wheels, etc): 

a) Parts of metal 15 K. 

b) Parts of insulating material 25 K 

NOTES 

1 The expression 'silver-faced' includes solid silver inserts 
as well as electrolytically deposited silver, provided that, 
in the latter case, the temperature rise requirement of 7.4.6 
are satisfied. 

Contacts faced with other materials, the contact resistance 
of which is not significantly altered by oxidation, are 
treated as silver-faced contacts, 

2 Limited solely by the necessity of not causing any damage 
to adjacent parts. 

3 To be specified according to the properties of the metals 
used and limited by the necessity of not causing any 
damage to adjacent parts. 

4 The resulting temperature shall not reach a value such 
that the elasticity of the material is impaired. For pure 
copper, this implies a total temperature not exceeding 

75°C. 

5 Limited solely by the necessity of not causing any damage 
to insulating materials. 

(■> The temperature rise limit of 70 K. is a value based on the 
conventional lest of 7.2.2. An equipment used or tested 
under installation conditions may have connections the 
type, nature and disposition of which will not be the same 
as those adopted for the test; a different temperature rise 
of terminal may result and it may be rejected or accepted. 

is described as enclosed equipment in the manufacturer's 
catalogues and normally intended for use with one or 
more enclosures of specified type and size (see Note 2). 

The value of the conventional enclosed thermal current 
shall be at least equal to the maximum value of the rated 
operational current (see 3.3.2.3) of the enclosed 

equipment. 



If the equipment is normally intended for use in 
unspecified enclosures, the test is not mandatory if the 
test for conventional free air thermal current ■(/ ) has 
been made. In this case, the manufacturer shall be 
prepared to give guidance on the value of enclosed 
thermal current or the derating factor. 

NOTES 

1 This current is not a ratir.3 and is not mandatorily marked 

on the equipment. 

2 The conventional enclosed thermal current value may be 

for unventilated equipment in which case the enclosure used 
for the test shall be of the size stated by the manufacturer 
as being the smallest that is applicable in service. 
Alternatively, the value may be for a ventilated equipment 
according to the manufacturer's data. 

3 An enclosed equipment is an equipment normally intended 

for use with a specified type and size of enclosure or 
intended for use with more than one type of enclosure. 

3.3.2.3 Rated operational currents (I c ) or rated 
operational powers 

A rated operational current of an equipment is stated by 
the manufacturer and takes into account the rated 
operational voltage (see 3.3.1.1), the rated frequency 
(see 3.3.3), the rated duty, the utilization categories and 
the type of protective enclosure, if appropriate. 

In the case of equipment for direct switching rjf 
individual motors, the indication of a rated operational 
current may be replaced or supplemented by an 
indication of the maximum rated power output, at the 
rated operational voltage considered, of the motor for 
which the equipment is intended. The manufacturer shall 
be prepared to state the relationship assumed between 
the operational current and the operational power, if any. 

For the purpose of this standard, the preferred values of 
rated current shall be 16, 32, 63 and 100A. 

3.3.2.4 Rated uninterrupted current (/ u ) 

The rated uninterrupted current of an equipment is a 
value of current, stated by the manufacturer, which the 
equipment can carry in uninterrupted duty. 

3.3.3 Rated Frequency 

The supply frequency for which an equipment is 
designed and to which the other characteristic values 
correspond. 

For the purpose of this standard, the rated frequency 
shall be 50 Hz. 



IS 10027 : 2000 



3.3.4 Rated Making Capacity 

The rated making capacity of an equipment is a value 
of current, stated by the manufacturer, which the 
equipment can satisfactorily make under specified 
making conditions. 

The making conditions which shall be specified are: 

- the applied voltage 

- the characteristics of the test circuit 

The rated making capacity is stated by reference to be 
rated operational voltage and rated operational current, 
according to the relevant product standard. 

NOTES 

1 For a.c, rated making capacity is expressed by the r.tn.s. 

value of the symmetrical component of the current, assumed 
to be constant. 

2 Far a.c. the peak value of the current during the first half- 
cycles following the closing of the main contacts of the 
equipment may be appreciably greater than the peak value 
of the current under steady state condition used in the 
determination of making capacity, depending on the power- 
factor of the circuit and the instant on the voltage wave 
when closing occurs. 

3 An equipment should be capable of closing on a current 
having the a.c, component equal to that which defines its 
rated nraking capacity, whatever the value of the inherent 
d.c. component, within the limits resulting from the power- 
factors indicated in the Indian Standard. 



The rated making capacity is stated by reference to the rated 
operational voltage and rated operational current and to 
the utilization category according to Table 2. 

3.3.4.1 For a.c. the making current is expressed by the 
r.m.s. value of the periodic component of the current. 

3.3.5 Rated Breaking Capacity 

The rated breaking capacity of an equipment is a value 
of current, stated by the manufacturer, which the 
equipment can satisfactorily break, under specified 
breaking conditions. 

The breaking conditions which shall be specified are: 

- the characteristics of -the test circuit 

- the power frequency recovery voltage 

The rated breaking capacity is stated by reference to the 
rated operational voltage and rated operational current. 

An equipment shall be capable of breaking any value . 
current up to an including its rated breaking capacity 



of 



NOTES 

I A switching device may have more than one rated breaking 
capacity, each corresponding to an operational voltage and 
a utilization category (AC -21 A or AC-21 B in this case). 



Table 2 Verification of Rated Making and Breaking Capacities (see 7.4) Conditions for 
Making and Breaking Corresponding to the Various Utilization Categories 

(Clauses 3.3.4, 3.3.7 and 7.4.4) 



Ionization 
Category 



Rated Operational 
Current 



/// 



Make-Break 

VJU cos a 



AC-21 A 
and AC-21B 



All values 



Number of 
Operating Cycles 



1.5 



1.05 



0.95 



where 




/ 


Making current 


/ t 


Breaking current 


/ 


Rated operational current 


(■ = 


Applied voltage 


l \- = 


Rated operational voltage 


l,\ - 


Power frequency recovery voltage 



IS 10027 : 2000 



2 For ax. the rated breaking capacity is expressed by the rms 
value of symmetrical component of the current. 

The rated breaking capacity is stated by reference to the 
rated operational voltage and rated voltage current and 
to the utilization categories according to Table 3 
and 3.3.5. 

3.3.6 Rated Fused Short-Circuit Current 

The rated fused short-circuit current of the equipment 
is the value of prospective current, stated by the 
manufacturer, which the equipment can satisfactorily 
withstand until the fuse blows. 

The value of rated fused short-circuit current shall 
be as follows: 



Rated Current 
(A) 
16 
32 
63 
100 



Fused Short-Circuit 
Current (A) (r.m.s.) 

2 000 

4 000 

4 000 

4 000 



The standard power factor shall be 0.8 and the ratio 
between the peak and the r.m.s. value of current shall 

be 1.47. 

A power factor of 0.4 may be agreed to between the 
manufacturer and the user for special application, if 
necessary. 

3.3.7 Utilization Category 

The utilization categories define the intended 
applications and are given in Table 3. 

Each utilization category is characterized by the values 
of the current and voltages, expressed as multiples of 
the rated operational current and the rated operational 
voltage, as well as the power-factor or time-constants 
of the circuit. The conditions for making and breaking 
given in Table 2. Correspond in principle to the 
applications listed in Table 3. 

The designation of utilization categories is completed 
by the suffix A or B according to whether the intended 
applications require frequent or infrequent operations 
(see Table 3). 

Utilization categories with suffix B are appropriate for 
devices which, due to design or application, are only 
intended for infrequent operation. This could apply, for 



example, to disconnectors normally only operated to 
provide isolation for maintenance work or switching 
devices where the fuselink blade forms the moving 
contact. 

Table 3 Utilization Categories 

(Clauses 3.3.5 and 3.3.7) 



Nature of 


Frequent 


Infrequent 


Typical 


Current 


Operation 


Operation 


Applications 


Alternating 


AC-21A 


AC-21B 


Switching of 


current 






resistive loads 
including 
moderate 
overloads 



The utilization categories referred to in Table 2 and 3 
do not apply to an equipment normally used to start, 
accelerate and/or stop individual motors. The utilization 
categories for such an equipment are dealt with in 
Annex A of IS 13947 (Part 3). 

3.3.8 Operational Performance 

Tests concerning the verification of the operational 
performance of an equipment are intended to verify that 
the equipment is capable of making and breaking without 
failure, the currents flowing in its main circuit for the 
intended use. 

The number of operating cycles and the test circuit 
parameters for the operational performance test for the 
various utilization categories are given in Tables 
4 and 4 A. 

The test conditions are specified in 7.6.1. 

3.3.9 Durability 

NOTE — The term durability has been chosen instead of 
endurance in order to express the expectancy of the number of 
operating cycles which can be performed by the equipment 
before repair or replacement of parts. Moreover the term 
endurance is also commonly used to cover operational 
performance as defined in 3.3.8 and it was deemed necessary 
not to use the term endurance in this standard in order to avoid 
confusion between the two concepts. 

3.3.9.1 Mechanical durability 

With respect to its resistance to mechanical wear, an 
equipment is characterized by the number, stated in 
7.7.1, of this standard of no-load operating cycles (that 
is without current at the main contacts) which can be 
effected before it becomes necessary to service or replace 
any mechanical parts; however normal maintenance 
according to the manufacturer's' instructions may be 
permitted for equipment designed to be maintained 



IS 10027 : 2000 

Each operating cycle consists of one closing operation 
followed by one opening operation. 



NOTE — Preferred number of no-load and on-load operating 
cycles are given in Table 4. 



The equipment shall be mounted according to the 4 STANDARD CONDITIONS FOR OPERATION 

manufacturer's instructions for the test. IN SERVICE 



3.3.9.2 Electrical durability 



4.1 Normal Service Condition 



With respect to its resistance to electrical wear an Equipmentcornp i yingwiththiss tandard shall be capable 

equipment is characterized by the number of on-load ofoperatingunderthestandard conditions given in 4. 1.1 

operating cycles corresponding to the service conditions + I * . - . , , j, 4 :„„„ ,-„ ^„,:^ /„„„ 

■ .--«,., , , .. to 4.1,4. For non-standard conditions in service (see 

given in 7.7.2 which can be made without repair or A A ^ 

replacement. 

Table 4 Verification of Operational Performance Number of Operating Cycles 
Corresponding to the Rated Operational Current 

{Clauses 3.3.8, 3.3.9.2. and 7.6. 1.1) 



Rated 

Operational 
Current / 



Number of 
Operating 
Cycles per 
Hour 



Without 
current 



Number of Operating Cycles 



I 

a.c. 

A Categories 

I 



With 
current 



Total 



B Categories 
J 



1 

Without 
current 



With Total 
current 



(1) 


(2) 


(3) (4) (5) 


(6) (7) 


(8) 


on oo 


120 8 500 1500 10 000 1700 300 


2 000 




Table 4A Test Circuit Parameters for Table 4 


Utilization 
Category 


Rated Operational 
Current 


Making (I) 
IJ1. VJV, cos a 


Breaking 
/.// UIV. 


cos a 


AC-21A 
andAC-21B 


All values 


1 1 0.95 


1 1 0.95 



where 
/ 


Making current 


/. 


Breaking current 


/ 


Rated operational current 


U 


Voltage before make (applied voltage) 


'-{■ 


Rated operational voltage 


u 


Power frequency recovery voltage 



For a.c. the making current is expressed by the r.m.s. value of the periodic component of the current. 



IS 10027 : 2000 



4.1.1 Ambient Air Temperature 

The ambient air temperature does not exceed 40°C and 
its average over a period of 24 h does not 

exceed + 35°C. 

NOTE — Equipment intended to be used in ambient 
temperatures-above + 40'C (for example, in forges, boiler rooms, 
tropical countries or below-5"C shall be designed or used 
according to an agreement between manufacturer and user. 
Information given in the manufacturer's catalogue may take 
the place of such an agreement. 

4.1.2 Altitude 

The altitude of the site of installation shall not exceed 

2 000 m. 

NOTE — For installations at higher altitudes, it is necessary to 
take into account the reduction of the dielectric strength and of 
the cooling effect of the air. Equipment so used shall be 
designed or used according to an agreement between 
manufacturer and user. Information given in the manufacturer's 
catalogue may take the place of such an agreement. 

4.1.3 Atmospheric Conditions 

The air is clean and its relative humidity does not exceed 
50 percent at a maximum temperature of +40°C. Higher 
relative humidities may be permitted at lower 
temperature, for example, 90 percent at +20°C. Care 
shall be taken of moderate condensation which may 
occasionally occur due to variations in temperature. 

4.1.4 Condition of Installation 

The equipment is installed in accordance with the 
manufacturer's instructions. 

5 STANDARD CONDITIONS FOR 
CONSTRUCTION 

S.l Mechanical Design 

5.1.1 General 

Materials shall be suitable for the particular application. 
The enclosed and the open positions of the equipment 
shall be definite and- shall be clearly indicated either 
adjacent to the actuator or by the position of the latter. 
If symbols are used, 'I' and 'O' shall be used to indicate 
the closed and open positions respectively. The position 
indicator shall be connected to the moving contacts in a 
reliable way; the handle may form such an indicator, 
provided it cannot indicate the off position unless all 
the moving contacts are in the open position. 



The operation shall be independent manual. 

5. 1 .2 Operating Handle 

The operating handle of the equipment shall be insulated 
from the live parts for the rated insulation voltage. 
Moreover: 

a) if it is made of metal, it ^hall be capable of 
being satisfactorily connected to a protective 
conductor unless it is provided with additional 
reliable insulation; and 

b) if it is made of or completely covered by 
insulating material, any internal metal parts, 
which might become accessible in the event of 
insulation damage, shall also be insulated from 
live parts for the rated insulation voltage or 
shall be capable of being satisfactorily 
connected to a protective conductor. 

5.1.3 Terminals 

5.1.3.1 Constructional requirements 

All parts of terminals which maintain contact and carry 
current shall be of metal having adequate mechanical 
strength. The use of aluminium conductors as well as 
copper conductors shall be taken into account. 

Terminal connections shall be such that the conductors 
may be connected by means of screws, springs or other 
equivalent means so as to ensure that the necessary 
contact pressure is maintained. 

Terminals shall be so constructed that the conductors 
can be clamped between suitable surface without any 
significant damage either to conductors or terminals. 

Terminals shall not allow the conductors to be displaced 
or be displaced themselves in a manner detrimental to 
the operation of equipment and the insulation voltage 
shall not be reduced below the rated values. 

Examples of terminals are given in Annex B. 

5.1.3.2 Connecting capacity 

The manufacturer shall state the type (rigid solid or 
stranded or flexible), the minimum and the maximum 
cross-sections of conductors for which the terminal is 
suitable and, if applicable, the number of conductors 
simultaneously connectable to the terminal. However, 
the maximum cross-section shall not be smaller than 



IS 10027 : 2000 



that stated in 7.2' for the temperature rise test and the 
terminal shall be suitable for conductors of the same 
type (rigid solid or stranded or flexible) at least 2 sizes 
smaller, as given in the appropriate col of Tabie 5. 

Terminals for connection to external conductors shall 
be readily accessible during installation. 

Clamping screws and nuts shall not serve to fix any other 
component although they may hold the terminals in place 
or prevent them from turning. 

Table 5 Standard Cross-Section of Aluminium 

and Copper Conductors Corresponding 

to the Rated Currents 

(Clauses 5.1.3.2 and 7.2.2) 



SI No. 


Range of Test 


Aluminium 


Copper 




Current 


Conductor 


Conductor 






Size (mm 2 ) 


Size (mm 2 ) 


(!) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


«) 


0-8 


1.5 


1.0 


ii) 


8-!2 


1.5 


1.5 


iii) 


12-15 


2.5 


2.5 


iv) 


15-20 


4.0 


2.5 


v) 


20-25 


6 


4.0 


vi) 


25-32 


10 


6.0 


vii) 


32-50 


16 


10 


viii) 


50-65 


25 


16 


ix» 


65-85 


35 


25 


x) 


85-100 


50 


35 



5.1.3.3 Additional requirements for equipment 
provided with a neutral pole 

When an equipment is provided with a pole intended 
only for connecting the neutral, this pole shall be clearly 
identified to that effect by the letter 'N' (see 5.1.3.5). 

A switched neutral pole shall break not before and shall 
make not after the other poles. 

For equipment having a value of conventional thermal 
current not exceeding 63 A, the value shall be identical 
for all poles. 

For higher conventional thermal current values, the 
neutral pole may have a value of conventional thermal 
current different from that oi" the other poles, but not 
less than half that value or 63 A, whichever is the higher. 

5.1.3.4 Connections 

Terminals for connection to external conductors shall 



be readily accessible during installation. Clamping 
screws and nuts shall not serve to other component 
although they may hold the terminals in place or prevent 
them from turning. 

5.1.3.5 Terminals identification and marking 

Terminals shall be clearly and permanently identified 
in accordance with IS 1 1353. 

Terminals intended exclusively for the neutral conductor 
shall be identified by the letter 5 N'. 

5.1.4 Earthing 

5.1.4.1 The assembly comprising metallic chassis, 
framework and the fixed parts of the metal enclosures 
shall be provided with two separate earthing terminals. 
These terminals shall be proved over and above all other 
means provided for securing metallic enclosures (armour 
or other metallic covering) of current-carrying cables. 

5.1.4.2 The earthing terminals shall be readily 
accessible and so placed that the earth connection is 
maintained when the cover of any other movable parts 
is removed. 

5.1.4.3 /The earthing terminals shall be of adequate size, 
be protected against corrosion and shall be metallically 
clean. Under no circumstances shall a movable metal 
part of the enclosure be insulated from the part carrying 
the earthing terminals when the movable part is in place. 

5.1.4.4 The earthing terminals shall be identified by 
means of the symbol marked in a legible and indelible 
manner on or adjacent to the terminals. 

5.2 Enclosures 

The enclosure seal be so arranged that, when it is opened, 
the terminals as well as all parts requiring maintenance, 
as prescribed by the manufacturer, are readily accessible. 

5.2.1 Sufficient space shall be left in the interior of the 
enclosure for the accommodation of external conductors 
from their point of entry into the enclosure as far as the 
terminal. 

5.2.2 The movable parts of the protective enclosure 
shall be firmly secured to the fixed parts by a device 
such that they cannot be accidentally loosened or 
detached owing to the effects of operation of the 
equipment. 



IS 10027 : 2000 



5.2.3 The enclosure of the unit shall be so designed as 
to allow the cover to open without the use of tools and 
the following requirements shall be fulfilled: 

a) It shall not be possible to open the cover unless 
the switch is in the 'off position. 

b) With the cover of the enclosure open, means shall 
be provided so that: 

1 ) the fastening devices do not get lost; 

2) it is not possible to close the switch; and 

3) there is no possibility of accidental contact 
with the live parts. 

5.2.4 Degree of Protection 

Degree of protection as declared by the manufacturer 
shall be verified in accordance with Annex C. 

5.3 Temperature Rise 

The temperature rise of the several parts of an equipment, 
measured during the test carried out under the conditions 
specified in 7.2, shall not exceed the values specified in 
Table 1, The temperature rise limits given therein are 
applicable only if the ambient air temperature remains 
within the limits given in 4.1.1. 

5.4 Dielectric Properties 

The equipment shall be capable of withstanding the 
dielectric tests specified in 7.3. 

5.5 Operating Conditions 

The equipment shall be operated in accordance with the 
manufacturer's instruction, if any, especially for 
equipments with dependent manual operation where the 
making and breaking capacities may depend on the skill 
of the operator. 

6 PRODUCT INFORMATION 

6.1 The following information shall be submitted by 
the manufacturer: 

- Detailed drawing of the equipment indicating 
type and design of the equipment covering all 
parameters given at 5. 

6.2 Markings 

The equipment shall be marked in a durable manner with 
the data given below: 



symbols are used, they shall indicate the closed 
and open positions respectively as follows: 

I ON (Power) 
O Off (Power) 

The following data shall also be marked on the 
equipment but need not be visible from the front 
when the equipment is mounted. 

b) Manufacturer's name or trade-mark; 

c) Type designation as per 6.1 and serial number; 

d) Rated operational current (or rated power) at the 
rated operational voltage and utilization category 
(see 3.3.1, 3.3.2 and 3.3.4); 

e) Value (or range) of the rated frequency or the 
indication; 

f) Rewirable fuse type and maximum rated current; 

g) Ref to IS 10027 if certified by BIS; 

h) Degree of protection of enclosed equipment; 

The following terminals shall be identified: 

j) line and load terminals; 
k) neutral pole terminal, if applicable, by the lever 
■N'; 

The following data shall be made available in the 
manufacturer's published information: 

m), rated insulation voltage; arid 
n) rated fused short-circuit current. 

6.3 BIS Certification Marking 

The equipment may also be marked with Standard Mark. 

6.3.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by 
the provisions of Bureau oflndidnStandards Act, 1 986 
and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The 
details of conditions under which the licence for the use 
of Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian 
Standards. 

7 TESTS 

7.0 Kinds of Tests 

7.0.1 General 

Tests shall be made to prove compliance with the 
requirements lajd down in this standard. 
Tests are as follows: 

- Type tests which shall be made on representative 
samples of each particular equipment. 



a) Indication of the open and closed position. If - Routine tests which shall be made on each 



IS 10027 : 2000 



individual piece of equipment manufactured to 
this standard. 

The above tests may consist of test sequence of required 
by purchaser or certifying authority. 

The tests shall be carried out by the manufacturer, at his 
works or at any suitable laboratory directed by purchaser/ 
or certification authority. 

7.0.2 Type Tests 

Type tests are intended to verify compliance of the 
design of a given equipment with this standard. 

They may comprise, as appropriate, the verification of: 

Constructional requirements (5 ), 

- Temperature rise (7.2). 
Dielectric properties (7.3), 

- Making and breaking capacities (7.4), 

- Rated fused short-circuit current (7.5), 

- Mechanical durability (7.7,1), 

- Electrical durability (7.7.2), 
Operational performance (7.6.1), and 

- Degree of protection of enclosed equipment 
(Annex C). 

7.0.3 Acceptance Test 



7.1 General Conditions of Test 

7.1.1 The equipment to be tested shall agree in all its 
essential details with the drawings of the type which it 
represents. Unless otherwise specified, each type test 
shall be carried out on an equipment in a clean and new 
condition. 

7.1.2 For the tests, the equipment shall be mounted and 
installed as indicated by the manufacturer. The details 
of the installation (type and size of enclosure 
if any, size of conductor, etc) shall be part of the test 
report. 

Unless otherwise stated, the test shall be made with the 
same kind of current (and, in the case of a.c. the same 
frequency and with the same number of phases) as in 
the intended service. 

If for convenience of testing, it appears desirable to 
increase the severity of a test (that is to adopt a higher 
rate of operation in order to reduce the duration of the 
test), this may be done only with the consent of the 
manufacturer. 

NOTE — Equipment under test shall be mounted complete on 
its own support or an equivalent support and connected as in 
normal service, in accordance with the manufacturer's 
instructions and under the ambient conditions stated 
in 4.1.1. 



They comprise all tests at 7.0.2 except the following : 

- Rated fused short-circuit current (7.5), 

- Operational performance (7.6.1), 
Electrical durability (7.7.2), and 

- Degree of protection of enclosed equipment 
(Annex C). 

7.0.4 Routine Tests They comprise : 

Operation tests (7.8.1), and 

- Dielectric test (7.8.2). 

7.0.5 Sampling Tests 

Sampling tests may also be made to verify specific 
properties or characteristics of an equipment, either on 
the manufacturer's own initiative, or by agreement 
between manufacturer and user. The tests may comprise: 

a) Functional tests, and 

b) Dielectric tests. 



7.2 Verification of Temperature Rise Limits 

7.2.1 Ambient Air Temperature 

The ambient air temperature shall be measured during 
the last quarter of the test period by means of at least 
two thermometers or thermocouples equally distributed 
around the equipment at about half its height and at a 
distance of about 1 m from the equipment. The 
thermometers or thermocouples shall be protected 
against air currents heat radiation and indicating errors 
due to rapid temperature changes. 

7.2.2 Temperature Rise Tests of the Main Circuit 

The equipment shall be mounted approximately as under 
usual service conditions and shall be protected against 
undue external heating or cooling. 

When temperature rise tests are made on an enclosed 
equipment, no openings giving false ventilation shall 
be allowed. 

For equipment not supplied with an enclosure but 



10 



IS 10027 : 2000 



intended to be used in an enclosure, the test for the rated 
current corresponding to an enclosed mounting shall be 
carried out in a chamber as stated by the manufacturer 
to be equivalent to the smallest enclosure that is 
applicable in service. 

It is permissible, before beginning the tests, to operate 
the fuse-combination unit a few times with or without 
load. 

The temperature rise is made at the rated current. 

Tests ^hall be made at frequency between 45 and 
62 Hz. 

Fuse-combination units shall be fitted with fuse-wire 
having a rated current equal to the rated current of the 
combination unit. 

The test shall be made over a period of time sufficient 
for the temperature rise to reach a steady-state value, 
but not exceeding 8 h. In practice, this condition is 
reached when the variation does not exceed l°C/h . 

NOTE — In practice, to shorten the test the current may be 
increased during the first part of the test; and may be reduced 
to the specified test current afterwords. 

At the end of the test, the temperature rise of the different parts 
of the main circuit shall not exceed the values specified in 
Table 1 . 

The connections shall be single-core, PVC insulated, 
aluminium cables or copper cables with cross-sectional 
areas as given in Tafele 5. 

In case of multipole equipment tested with a.c. the test 
shall be carried out with single-phase current, with all 
poles connected in series, but only as far as the errors 
resulting from magnetic influences can be neglected. 

The connections shall be in free air and spaced not less 
than the distance existing between the terminals. 

The minimum length of each temporary connection from 
terminal to terminal shall be: 

a) 1 m for cross-sections up to and including 
16 mm 2 ; and 

b) 2 m for cross-sections larger than 16 mm 2 . 

7.2.3 Measurement of the Temperature 

The temperature of the different parts shall be measured 
by means of the thermocouples at the nearest accessible 
position to the hottest spot. 



Good heat conductivity between the thermocouple and 
the surface of the part under test shall be ensured. The 
thermocouple wire and junction shall be such that they 
do not influence the temperature rise of the part under 

test. 

7.2.4 Temperature Rise of a Part 

The temperature rise of a part is the difference between 
the temperature of this part measured in accordance 
with 7.2.3 and the ambient air temperature measured 
in accordance with 7.2.1. 

7.2.5 Corrections 

If the ambient air temperature during the test is between 
+10°C, no correction is necessary to take account of the 
ambient temperature during the test and the values of 
Table 1 are the limiting values of temperature rise. If 
the ambient air temperature during the test exceed +40°C 
or is lower than +10°C, the manufacturer and the user 
shall make a special agreement. 

7.3 Verification of Dielectric Properties 

7.3.1 Condition of the Equipment for Tests 

Dielectric tests shall be made on new equipment 
mounted approximately as under usual service 
conditions, including internal wiring, and in a dry 
condition. 

When the base of equipment is of insulating material, 
metallic parts shall be placed at all the fixing points in 
accordance with the conditions of normal installation 
of the equipment and these parts shall be considered as 
part of the frame of the equipment. When the equipment 
is in an insulating enclosure, the latter shall be covered 
by a metal foil connected to the frame. If the operating 
handle is metallic, it shall be ponneqted to the frame; if 
it is of insulating material, it shall be covered by a metal 
foil connected to frame. 

Equipment not supplied with an enclosure but intended 
to be used in an enclosure shall be tested in an enclosure 
stated by the manufacturer to be equivalent to the 
smallest that is applicable in service. 

When the dielectric strength of the equipment is 
dependent upon the taping or leads or the use of special 
insulation, such taping or special insulation shall also 
be used during the tests. 



11 



IS 10027 : 2000 



7.3.2 Application of the Test Voltage 

The test voltage shall be applied for one minute as 
follows: 

a) With the contacts closed: 

1 ) between all live parts of all poles connected 
together and the frame of the equipment; and 

2) between each pole and all the other poles 
connected to the frame of the equipment. 

b) With the contacts open: 

1 ) between all live parts of all poles connected 
together, and the frame of the equipment; and 

2) between the term inals of one side connected 
together, and the terminals of the other side 
connected together. 

For the purpose of the above tests, an insulated neutral 
is to be considered as a pole of the equipment. 

7.3.3 Value of the Test Voltage 

The test voltage shall have a sinusoidal waveform, and 
a frequency between 45 Hz and 62 Hz. The source of 
the test voltage shall be capable of supplying a short- 
circuit current of at least 0.5 A. 

Unless otherwise specified, the values of the test voltage 
shall be 2 000 V and 2 500 V respectively for 240 V and 
415V rated equipment. 

7.4 Verification of Rated Making and Breaking 
Capacities 

7.4.1 Condition of the Apparatus for Tests 

The apparatus under test shall be mounted complete in 
its own enclosure and any apertures normally closed in 
service shall be closed for the test. For apparatus not 
supplied with an enclosure but intended to be used in an 
enclosure, the test shall be carried out in an enclosure 
stated by the manufacturer to be equivalent to the 
smallest that is applicable in service. The operating 
mechanism shall be operated in a manner similar to that 
stated by the manufacturer as being normal. 

While carrying out the test, fuse-links shall be replaced 
by links of negligible impedance. 

7.4.2 Test Procedure 

The test circuit shall be as described in 7.4.3. The 
mechanical switching device shall be closed and opened 



5 times with an interval of approximately 30s between 
operations. 

During each make-break operating cycle, the equipment 
need only stay in the dosed position for a period long 
enough to allow the switching operation to be completed 
and to enable the current value to be established and the 
moving parts of the switching device to come to rest. 
After each operating cycle, the recovery voltage shall 
be maintained for at least 0.1s. 

The test voltage and the load shall be applied to the 
appropriate terminals of the apparatus. For apparatus 
in which a moving contact remains connected to one of 
the terminals when the apparatus is in the open position, 
this test shall be repeated with the supply and load 
connections interchanged, unless the terminals are 
specifically and clearly, marked for load and supply. 

7.4.3 Test Circuit for the Verification of the Rated 
Making and Breaking Capacities 

Figures 1, 2 and 3 give the diagram of the circuits to be 
used for the tests. 

The resistances /?, and R 2 and the reactances X, and L 2 
of the test circuit shall be adjusted to satisfy the specified 
test conditions. The resistors shall be air cored. They 
shall always be connected tothe resistors and their values 
may be obtained by series coupling of individual 
reactors. Parallel connecting of reactors is permitted 
when these reactors have practical 1 / the same time 
constant. 

The test circuit loads X, and ./?, shall be connected on 
the load side of the apparatus. 

The prospective short-circuit current at the point of 
connection to the supply terminals of the apparatus shall 
be at least 10 times the value of the test current. 

All parts of the apparatus normally earthed in service, 
including its enclosure, shall be insulated from earth and 
connected to a point as indicated in Fig. 1, 2 and 3. 
This connection shall include a reliable device D (such 
as a fuse consisting of a copper wire of 0. 1 mm diameter 
and not less than 50 mm length) for the detection of the 
fault current and, if necessary, a resistor limiting the 
value of the prospective fault current to about 100 A. 
Any artificial neutral shall be substantially inductive, 
and permit a prospective fault current of at least 100 A. 
The test circuit shall be directly earthed .at one point 
only and the position of this point shall be stated in the 
test report. 



12 



IS 10027 : 2000 



For tests corresponding to utilization category 'AC -21 
A or AC -2 1 B' it is not necessary to adjust the oscillatory 
frequency of the prospective transient recovery voltage. 

7.4.4 Test Quantities 




s 

R r R, 

R, 
D 
A 
R 

O l 

a.o, 

r 



Supply 

Adjustable resistors 

Adjustable reactors 

Resistor for limiting the current in device D 

Device for detection of a fault current 

Equipment under test 

Temporary connection for prospective current calibration 

To current recording oscilloscopes 

To voltage recording osilloscopes 

Voltmeter 



The tests shall be performed with values stated by the 
manufacturer in accordance with Table 2. 

The tests shall be taken as valid if the values recorded in 
the test report differ from the values specified only within 
the following tolerances: 



a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 



Current 
Voltage 
Power-factor 
Time-constant 
S 



■± 5 percent 
± 5 percent 
±0.05 

± 15 percent 
N 




,/?, 



S 

N 

L,,L 2 

D 
A 
B 
O t 

o 2 ,o, 

V 



Supply 

To the neutral point or mid-point of the d.c. supply 

Adjustable resistors 

Adjustable reactors 

Resistor for limiting the current in device D 

Device for detection of a fault current 

Equipment under test 

Temporary connection for prospective current calibration 

To current recording oscilloscopes 

To voltage recording osilloscopes 

Voltmeter 



Fig. 1 Diagram of the Test Circjt for Single-Pole 
Equipment on Single-Phase a.c. 



Fig. 2 Diagram of the Test Circuit for a Two- Pole 
Equipment on Single-Phase a.c. 



13 



IS 10027 : 2000 



, _n_ 



a f?73_iVv---°jl-i-/ X 



-0 




.V Supply 

A' To the neutral point 

R . R, Adjustable resistors 

/.,. /., Adjustable reactors 

R, Resistor for limiting the current in device D 

D Device for detection of a fault current 

A Equipment under test 

B Temporary connection for prospective current calibration 

O, To current recording oscilloscopes 

O, , O, To voltage recording osilloscopes 

I' Voltmeter 

Fig. 3 Diagram of the Test Circuit for a Three-Pole 
Equipment on Three-Phase a.c. 

The tests shall be made at the rated frequency of the 
apparatus as far as the testing station permits. If this 
frequency cannot be obtained, the test shall be made at 
a frequency between 45 and 62 Hz. 

The power-factor shall be deemed to be the average of 
the cosines of the angles of phase displacement in all 
the phases, and the power-factor of any phase shall not 
vary from the average by more than 25 percent of that 
average. 

7.4.5 B-ehaviour of the Apparatus During the Making 
and Breaking Tests 

The apparatus shall perform during the above tests in 
such a manner as not to endanger an operator or cause 



damage to adjacent equipment. There shall be no 
permanent arcing nor flashoverbetween poles or phases, 
and the fine wire fuse shall remain intact. 

The apparatus shall remain mechanically operable and 
contact welding, such as to prevent an operation using 
normal operating means,, is not permitted. 

7.4.6 Condition of the Apparatus after the Making and 
Breaking Tests 

After the tests made in accordance with 7.4.2, the 
apparatus shad be capable, without maintenance, of 
withstanding a voltage equal to twice its rated insulation 
voltage, applied as stated in 7.3.2. 

It shall be demonstrated immediately after the test that 
the mechanical switching device will close and open 
satisfactorily-tiuring a no-load close-open operation. 

NOTE — A closing operation is considered satisfactory when 
normal operation of the handle through its full stroke will close 
the contacts sufficiently for the mechanical switching device 
to be able to carry its rated current. 

The contacts shall be in suitable condition to carry the 
rated current. Where doubt exists, a temperature rise 
test shall be carried out on the same apparatus; the 
measured temperature rise shall not exceed by-more than 
10°C the values given in Table 1 or result in damage to 
adjacent parts. 

7.5 Verification of the Rated Fused Short-Circuit 
Current 

7.5.1 Condition of the Apparatus for the Test 

The apparatus shall be in the condition specified in 7.4.1 
and the fuse-wire stated by the manufacturer shall be 
used. 

7.5.2 A first test shall be made on the apparatus, with 
the mechanical switching device in the closed position, 
connected in series with a fuse-wire of the rated 
maximum current and rated breaking capacity deemed 
suitable by the manufacturer for use with that equipment. 
A prospective current corresponding to the rated fused 
short-circuit current of the apparatus shall be applied. 
The current value is the rms value determined from the 
prospective current oscillogram. 



A second test shall be made with new fuse-wire and the 
test circuit made live with the mechanical switching 
device open. The mechanical switching device shall be 
closed onto a prospective current .corresponding to the 
rated fused short-circuit current of the apparatus. 



14 



IS 10027 : 2000 



The recovery test shall be maintained for at least 
0. 1 second after interruption of the test current by the 

fuses. 



The time interval between Table 4 operating cycles with 
current and without current and the sequential order of 
the tests shall be stated in the test report. 



Details of the fuse-wire used for the test shall be given During each make-break operating cycle, the equipment 



in the test report. The type test with the specified fuse- 
wire shall be deemed to cover the use of any other fuse 
wire of rated cutrent not exceeding that of the fuse-wire 
used for the test. 

7.5.3 Test Circuit 

The provisions of 7.4.3 shall apply. 

The test circuit loads L l and R ] are not included for the 
fused short-circuit current test. 

7.5.4 Test Quantities 

The test shall be made at the rated frequency of the 
apparatus as far as the testing station permits. If this 
frequency cannot be obtained, the tests shall be made at 
frequency between 45 and 62 Hz. 

The average value of the power-frequency recovery 
voltage shall be equal to a value corresponding to not 
less than 110 percent and not more than 113 percent of 
the rated voltage stated by the manufacturer. The power- 
factor of the circuit shall be in accordance with 3.3.6. 
The r.m.s. value of the a.c. component of the prospective 
current in any phase shall be equal to the specified value 
with a tolerance of +15 percent. 
-o 

7.5.5 Behaviour of the Apparatus During the Rated 
Fused Short-Circuit Current Test 

The apparatus shall behave as specified in 7.4.5. 

7.5.6 Condition of the Apparatus after the Rated Fused 
Short-Circuit Current Test 

After the test, the apparatus shall comply with the 
requirements of 7.4.6. The mechanical parts and the 
insulation of the apparatus shall be substantially in the 
same condition as before. 

7.6 Verification of the Mechanical Endurance 

7.6.1 Operational Performance Test 

7.6.1.1 Test values and conditions 

The test values are stated in Table 4 and 4A and 3.3.8 
according to the utilization category. 



need only stay in the closed position for a period long 
enough to allow switching operation to be completed 
and to enable the current value to be established and the 
moving parts of the equipment to come to rest. After 
each operating cycle, the recovery voltage shall be 
maintained for at least 0.05 s. 

For a.c. the power-factor of the test circuit shall be 
determined in accordance with 7.4.4. The values shall 
be in accordance with Table 4A and 3.3.8. 

7.6.1.2 Test Circuit (see 7.4) 

7.6.1.3 Transient recovery voltage 

It is not necessary to adjust the transient recovery voltage. 

7.6.1.4 Behaviour of the equipment during the 
operational performance test 

The equipment shall perform during the above tests in 
such a manner as not to endanger an operator or cause 
damage to adjacent equipment. 

There shall be no permanent arcing or flash-over 
between poles or between poles and frame and no 
melting of the fuse in the detection circuit. 

The equipment shall remain mechanically operable, 
Contact welding, such as to prevent an opening operation 
using normal operating means, is not permitted, 

Some wear on the mechanism and contacts is allowed 
provided that the equipment functions correctly. 

7.6.1.5 Condition of the equipment after the 
operational performance test 

It shall be demonstrated immediately after the test that 
the equipment will close and open satisfactorily during 
a no-load close/open operation. 

A closing operation is considered satisfactory when 
normaf operation of the handle through its full stroke 
will close the contact efficiently for the equipment to be 
able to carry its rated ooerational current. 

After the tests and without maintenance the equipment 
shall comply with the requirements of 7.3. 



15 



IS 10027 : 2000 

The contacts shall be in a suitable condition to carry the 
rated operational current without maintenance and shall 
comply with the temperature-rise verification of 7.2. 

7.7 Durability (see 3.3.9) 

7.7.1 Mechanical Durability 

The mechanical durability test (see 3.3.9.1) where 
required, is made in accordance with the appropriate 
requirements of 7.6.1 except that for equipment suitable 
for isolation, the maximum value of leakage cornet shall 
not exceed 6 mA per pole for all utilization categories. 

The total number of operating cycles shall be as declared 
by the manufacturer. 

If not stated by the manufacturer, the total number of 
operating cycles shall be taken from Table 4. 

7 .7.2 Electrical Durability 

The electrical durability test (see 3.3.9.2) where 
required, is made in accordance with the appropriate 
requirements of 7.6.1 except that for equipment suitable 
for the total number of operating cycles shall be as 
declared by the manufacturer. 



operating cycles shall be taken from Table 4. 
7.8 Routine Tests 

7.8.1 Mechanical Operational Test 

A test shall be made to verify the correct mechanical 
operation of the equipment by five closing and opening 
operations. 

7.8.2 Dielectric Test 

The tests shall be carried out on dry and clean 
equipment. 

The value of the test voltage shall be in accordance 
with 7.3.3. 

The duration of each test may be reduced to Is. 

The test voltage shall be applied as follows: 

a) Between poles with the main contacts closed 
(with the contacts open if there is a shunt circuit 
between poles), 

b) Between poles and the frame of the equipment 
with the main contacts closed, and 

c) Across the terminals of each pole with the main 
contacts open. 



If not stated by the manufacturer, total number of The use of a metal foil, as specified in 7.3.1, is necessary. 

ANNEX A 
(Clause 4 A) 

INFORMATION TO BE GIVEN BY THE USER WHEN CONDITIONS FOR 
OPERATION IN SERVICE DIFFER FROM THE STANDARD 



A-l AMBIENT AIR TEMPERATURE 

A-l.l The user shall state to the manufacturer the 
expected range of ambient air temperature if this 
temperature is lower than - 5°C or higher than + 40°C. 

A-2 ALTITUDE 

A-2. 1 The user shall state to the manufacturer the altitude 
of the place of installation if it is more than 2 000 m. 

A-3 ATMOSPHERIC CONDITIONS 

A-3.1 The user shall call the manufacturer's attention 
in case the atmosphere in which the equipment is to be 
installed may have a relative humidity greater than the 
values specified in 4.1.3 or contain an abnormal amount 
of dust, acids, corrosive gases, etc. The same applies if 



the equipment is to be installed near the sea. 

A-4 CONDITIONS OF INSTALLATION 

A-4.1 The user shall call the manufacturer's attention 
in case the equipment is to be fitted to a moving device, 
if its support is to be capable of assuming a sloping 
position either permanently or temporarily (equipment 
fitted aboard ships), or if it is to be exposed in service 
to abnormal shocks or vibrations. 



A-5 CONNECTIONS 
APPARATUS 



WITH OTHER 



A-5.1 The user shall inform the manufacturer of the 
type and dimensions of electrical connections with other 



16 



IS 10027 : 2000 



apparatus in order to enable him to provide enclosures 
and terminals meeting the conditions of installation and 
temperature rise prescribed by this standard, and also to 
enable him to provide space, where necessary, to spread 
out conductors within the enclosure. 



A-6 AUXILIARY CONTACTS 

A-6.1 The user shall specify the number and type of 
auxiliary contacts to be supplied to satisfy requirements, 
such as signalling interlocking, etc. 



ANNEX B 
(Clause 5.1.3.1) 

EXAMPLES OF TERMINALS 



v»i i i j .» ■ [ 




Optional 




Direct pressure through screw heed 




Optional 



Optional 





Indirect pressure threuQh intermediate pert 



,1 - 
li - 

c - 


Fixed part 

Washer or clamping plate 

Anti-spread device 


n - 


Conductor space 



NO'IT — Examples showirhere do not prohibit the conductor being divided either side of the screw, 

Screw terminal 

Screw-type terminal in which the conductor is clamped under the bead ofone or more screws. The clamping pressure may by applied directly 

In the head of the screw or through an intermediate part, such as a washer, clamping plate or anti-spread device. 



Fig. Bl Screw Terminals 



17 



IS 10027 : 2000 





Part of device 

with cavity for terminal 




Part of device 

with cavity for terminal 



Terminals without pressure plate 



Terminals with pressure plate 




Terminals with direct pressure 




VZz69 




Terminals with indirect pressure 



A — Fixed part 
ii — Body of the clamping unit 
Conductor space 



I) 



Pillar terminal 



^j~«=«a£:a:rss :ss:x= = 



Fig, B2 Pillar Terminals 



IS 10027 : 2000 



'v«dW 




Optional 



V ' 'II I ^ v** 




Optional 



/I 


- Fixed part 


/} - 


- Washer or clamping plate 


c - 


- Anti-spread device 


i) - 


- Conductor space 


F. - 


- Stud 



NOTI-; — The part which retains the conductor in position may be of insulating material, provided the pressure necessary to clamp the 
conductor is not transmitted through the insulating material. 

Stud terminal 

Screw-type terminal in which the conductor is clamped under one or two unit. The clamping pressure may by applied directly by a suitably 
shaped nut or through an intermediate part, such as a washer, clamping plate or anti-spread device. 

Fig. B3 Stud Terminals 

ANNEX C 
{Clauses 3.1, 5.2.4, 7.0.2 and 7.0.3) 

DEGREE OF PROTECTION OF ENCLOSED EQUIPMENT 



C-l GENERAL 

This annex provides information for specifying the 
degree of protection for enclosed equipment hereinafter 
referred to as equipment. 

It also specifies type tests to check the degree of 
protection on the various types of enclosures of enclosed 
equipment. 

All enclosed equipment is intended to provide protection 
as follows: 

a) Protection of persons against contact with live 
parts and against contact with moving parts (other 
than smooth rotating shafts and the like) inside 
the enclosure, and 

b) Protection of the equipment inside the enclosure 
against the ingress of solid foreign objects, and/ 
or 

c) Protection of the equipment inside the enclosure 
against harmful ingress of water. 

This annex does not specify the protection of equipment 
against mechanical damage, risk of explosion or 



conditions such as moisture (produced by example, by 
condensation) corrosive vapours, fungus, or vermin. 
Internal barriers are considered for low-voltage 
switchgear and controlgear as part of the enclosure 
provided they meet at least the requirements of degree 
IP2X. 

A part or the whole mounted equipment may constitute 
a part or the whole of a barrier. 

The basic tests and conditions are given in IS 12063 
but specific tests and interpretations apply to openings 
such as drain holes and ventilating openings, etc. All 
openings of enclosed equipment shall comply with the 
IP Code assigned to this equipment. 

Drain holes are openings situated at the bottom of the 
enclosure and are intended to prevent the accumulation 
of water due to condensation and/or ingress of water 
into the enclosure. They shall comply with the basic 
requirements for openings and not be smaller than 
2.5 mm in diameter. 

C-2 DESIGNATION (CLASSIFICATION 
SYSTEM) 

The designation to indicate the degree of protection 



19 



IS 10027 : 2000 



consists of the characteristics letters IP followed by two 
numerals (the 'characteristic numerals') indicating 
conformity with the conditions stated in Tables CI and 
C2 respectively. The first numeral indicates the degree 
of protection described under items a) and b) and the 
second numeral the degree of protection described under 
item c) of C-l. 

Enclosures fitted with drain holes and/or ventilating 
openings shall satisfy the tests corresponding to their 
respective IP Code. 

The degree of protection shall apply to all normal 
conditions of use. 

Where the mounting of the equipment has an influence 
on the degree of protection, this shall be indicated by 
the manufacturer in his instructions for mounting or the 

like. 

C-2. 1 Single Characteristic Numeral 

When it is required to indicate a class of protection by 
only one characteristic numeral, the omitted numeral 
shall be replaced by the letter X. For example IPX5 or 
IP2X. 

C-2.2 Supplementary Letters 

If required by the purchaser, supplier shall give 
additional information to be indicated by a suplementary 
letter or letters in the classification. In such cases, the 
product standard shaLl state clearly the additional 



conditions to be observed during tests for such a 
classification. 

The supplementary letters are as follows: 

W — (Placed immediately after the second 
characteristic numeral.) Equipment so designated is 
suitable for use under specific weather conditions and 
provision has been made for additional protective 
features or procedures. 

Both the specified weather conditions and the additional 
features or procedures shall be agreed between 
manufacurer and user. 

N — (Placed immediately after the second 
characteristic numeral.) Equipment so designated is 
suitable for use in environments where the particle size 
and the nature of the dust requires additional features 
to be added (for exmaple for use in sawmills and 
quarries). 

Both the specified conditions and the additional features 
shall be agreed between manufacturer and user. 

L — (Placed immediately after the first characteristic 
numeral 2, 3 or 4.) Equipment so identified has been 
tested to provide protection against ingress of solid 
objects exceeding 12.5 mm in diameter and against 
contact with live and moving parts by the standard test 
finger (see Fig. CI) in the case of first characteristic 
numeral 2, or a 2.5 mm diameter test probe in the case 
of characteristic numeral 3, or a 1 mm diameter test 
probe in the case of first characteristic numeral 4. 



Table CI Degrees of Protection Indicated by the First Characteristic Numeral 



l-'iist Characteristic 


Short Description 


Degree of Protection 


Test Conditions, 


Numeral and Suffix 




Definition 
(see C-3) 


Rcf to 



Protected against solid 
objects greater than 
50 mm 



Excludes solid objects 
exceeding 50 mm in dia 
and protects against contact 
with live and moving parts by 
a large body surface such as a 
hand (but not against deliberate 
access) 



C-7.1 



Protected against solid 
objects greater than 
12.5 mm and against 
contact by standard 
test finger 



Excludes solid objects 
exceeding 12.5 mm in 
diameter and protects 
against contact with 
live and moving parts 
by a standard test 
finger or similar 
objects not exceeding 
80 mm in iength 



C-7.2 



Protected against solid 
objects greater than 
2.5 mm 



Excludes solid objects 
exceeding 12.5 mm in 
diameter or thickness 



C -7.3.1 



20 



IS 10027 : 2000 



3L 



Protected against solid 
objects greater than 
12.5 mm and against 
contact by 2.5 mm probe 



Excludes solid objects 
exceeding 12.5 mm in 
diameter and protects 
against contact with 
live and moving parts 
by a 2.5 mm diameter 
test probe not exceeding 
100 mm in length 



C- 7.3.2 



Protected against solid 
objects greater than 
1 ,0 mm 



Excludes solid objects 
exceeding 1.0 mm in 
diameter or thickness 



C-7.4.1 



Protects against solid 
objects greater than 
12.5 mm and against 
contact by 1.0 mm probe 



Excludes solid objects 
exceeding 12.5 mm in 
diameter and protects 
against contact with 
live and moving parts 
by a 1.0 mm diameter 
test probe not exceeding 
100 mm in length 



C-7.4.2 



NOTE — The short description given in col 2 should not be used to specify the form of protection, 
description, 

S ±0,6-^- -'80- 



It should only be used as a brief 




Chamfer aH edge* 



Pan 



Pan 2 View on back side Part 



Linear dimensions in millimetres 

Tolerances on dimensions without specific tolerance: 



- 10 m\ angles - 10' 

on linear dimensions: 


i'pto2Miim: _ () ()? 

over "15 mm: ±0.2 



]J3^ ^_B- -fe> 



Material of finger: for example heat-treated steel 

+ 10° 
Both joints of this finger may be bent through an angle of 90 Q 

but in one and the same direction only. 

Using the pin and groove solution is only one of the possible 
approaches in order to limit the bending angle to 90°. For this reason 
dimensions and tolerances of these details are not given in the 
drawing. The actual design must ensure a 90° bending angle with a 
to + 10° tolerance. 



Fig. CI Standard Test Finger 
21 



IS 10027 : 2000 



C-2.3 Example of Designation 



Characteristic letters 



IP 



1 st characteristic numeral 
(see Table CI) 
Supplementary letter 



2nd characteristic numeral 

{see Table C 2) 

Equipment so designated provides protection against 
contacts with live and moving parts according to 
C-2.2 supplementary letter L, against ingress of solid 
objects greater than 12.5 mm and against splashing 
water. 



C-3 DEGREE OF PROTECTION 
CHARACTERISITC NUMERAL 



FIRST 



The first characteristic numeral indicates the degree of 
protection provided by the equipment both to the persons 
and to the equipment inside the enclosure. 

Table CI gives, in col 3, brief details of objects which 
will be excluded from the enclosure for each of the 
degrees of protection represented by the first 
characteristic numeral. 

The term excluded implies that a part of the body or a 
tool or a wire held by a person, either will not enter the 
enclosure or, if it is permitted to enter, that adequate 
distance will be maintained betweenit and the live parts 



or dangerous moving parts (smooth rotating shafts and 
the like are not considered dangerous). 

NOTE — The definition for adequate distance is given in 

C-6.1. 

Column 3 of Table CI also indicates the minimum size 
of solid foreign bodies which will be excluded. 

NOTE — Equipment assigned a first characteristic numeral of 
1 to 4 will exclude both regularly and irregularly shaped solid 
objects provided that three mutually perpendicular dimensions 
of the object exceed the appropriate value in col 3. 

Compliance of enclosed equipment with a stated degree of 
protection implies that the enclosure will also comply with all 
lower degree of protection in Table CI. In consequence, the 
tests establishing these degrees of protection need not be carried 
out. 

C-4 DEGREE OF PROTECTION — SECOND 
CHARACTERISTIC NUMERAL 

The second characteristic numeral indicates the degree 
of protection of enclosed equipment with respect to 
harmful ingress of water. 

Table C 2 gives, in col 3, details of the type of protection 
provided by the enclosure for each of the degree of 
protection represented by the second characteristic 
numeral. 

Compliance of an enclosure with a stated degree of 
protection implies that the enclosure will also comply 
with all lower degrees of protection in Table C2. In 
consequence, the tests establishing these degrees of 
protection need not necessarily be carried out. 



Table C 2 Degrees of Protection Indicated by the Second Characteristic Numeral 



First Characteristic 


Degr 

Short Description 


•ee of Protection 


Test Conditions, 


Numeral and Suffix 


Definition 
{see C-3) 


Refto 


1 


Protected against 
dripping water 


Dripping water (vertically 
falling drops) shall have 
r.o harmful effect 


C-8.1 


2 


Protected against 
dripping water when 
tilted up to 15 


Vertically dripping water 
shall have no harmful effect 
when the enclosure is tilted 
at any angle up to 1 5" from 
its normal position. 


C-8.2 


3 


Protected against 
spraying water 


Water falling as a spray at 
an angle up to 60° from the 
vertical shall have no harmful 
effect 


C-8.3 


4 


Protected against 
splashing water 


Water splashed against the 
enclosure from any direction 
shall have no harmful effect 


C-8.4 


j 


Protected against 
water jets 


Water projected by a nozzle 
against the enclosure from any 
direction shall have no harmful 
effect 


Cr8.5 



NOTE — The short description given in col 2 should not be used to specify the form of protection. It should only be used as a brief description 



22 



IS 10027 : 2000 



C-5 MARKING 

The requirements for marking are specified in the 
relevant product standard, where applicable. 

C-6 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR TESTS 

The tests in this annex are type tests. 

All tests shal be made with the equipment in an 
unenergized state. 

The samples of equipment for each test shall be in a 
clean and new condition with all parts fitted and 
assembled as stated by the manufacturer for normal use. 

Additional requirements, if any, my be given in the 
relevant product standard, concerning, for example 

— number of samples; and 

— mounting and installation of samples. 

In the absence of such requirements, the manufacturer 
instruction shall apply. 

The interpretation of test results is given in C-7 
and C-8. 

C-6.1 Adequate Distance 

For the purpose of the following test clauses in this 
annex, the term 'adequate distance' has the following 
meaning: the test device (sphere, finger, wire, etc) does 
not touch live parts or moving parts other than non- 
dangerous parts such as smooth rotating shafts. 

C -7 TEST FOR FIRST CHARACTERISTIC 
NUMERAL 

C-7.1 Test for First Numeral 1 

The test is made with a rigid sphere of 50 mm in 
diameter applied against the opening(s) of the 
equipment with a force of 50 N + 10 percent. 

The protection is satisfactory if the sphere does not 
pass though any opening and adequate distance is 
maintained to parts which are normally live in service 
or moving parts inside the enclosure. 

C-7.2 Test for First Numeral 2 

The test comprises two parts a) and b) which shall be 
effected as follows: 

a) Finger Test 

The test is made with a metal test finger as 
shown in Fig. CI. Both joints of this finger 



may be bent through an angle of 90° with respect 
to the axis of the finger, but in one and the same 
direction only. The finger is pushed without 
undue force (not more than 10 N against any 
openings in the enclosure, and if it enters, it is 
placed in the most unfavourable position within 
the equipment. 

The protection is satisfactory if adequate distance 
is maintained between the test finger and live or 
moving parts inside the enclosure. 

For this mechanical test, the internal moving parts 
may be operated slowly, where this is possible. 

A low-voltage supply (of not less than 40V) in 
series with a suitable lamp may be connected 
between the test finger and the live parts inside 
the enclosure. Conducting parts covered only 
with- varnish or paint, or protected by oxidation 
or by a similar process, shall be covered with a 
metal foil electrically connected to those parts 
which are normally live in service. 

The protection is satisfactory if the lamp does 
not light. 

b) Sphere Test 

The test is made with a rigid sphere of 12.5 mm 
in diameter applied to the openings of the 
enclosure with a force of 30 N ± 10 percent. 

The protection is satisfactory if the sphere does 
not pass through any opening and adequate 
distance is maintained to live or moving parts 
inside the enclosure. 

C-7.3 Test for First Numeral 3 

C-7.3.1 Protection Against Ingress of Solid Foreign 
Objects 

The test is made with a straight rigid steel wire or rod of 
2.5 mm diameter applied with a force of 3 N ± 1 percent. 
The end of the wire or rod shall be free from burrs and at 
right angles to its length. 

The protection is satisfactory if the wire or rod cannot 
enter the enclosure. 

C-7.3.2 Protection Against Contacts with Live and 
Moving Parts 

The test is made with a straight rigid steel wire or rod of 
2.5 mm diameter and 100 mm long with a force of 



23 



IS 10027 : 2000 



3 N ± 10 percent. The end of the wire or rod shall be 
hemispherically shaped. 

The protection is satisfactory if adequate distance is 
maintained with live and moving parts inside the 
enclosure. 

In addition, the sphere test for first numeral 2 is to be 

effected. 

C-7.4 Test for First Numeral 4 

C-7.4.1 Protection Against Ingress of Solid Foreign 

Objects 

The test is made with a straight rigi :' steel wire of 1 mm 
diameter applied with a force of lis ± 10 percent. The 
end of the wire shall be free from burrs and at right 
angles to its length. 

The protection is satisfactory if the wire cannot enter 
the enclosure. 

C-7.4.2 Protection Against Contacts with Live and 
Moving Parts 

The test is made with a straight rigid steel wire or 1 mm 
diameter and 100 mm long with a force of IN ± 10 
percent. The end of the wire shall be hemispherically 
shaped. 

The protection is satisfactory if adequate distance is 
maintained with live and moving parts inside the 
enclosure. 

In addition the sphere test for first numeral 2 is to be 

effected. 

C-8 TEST FOR SECOND CHARACTERISTIC 
NUMERAL 

The test shall be conducted with fresh water. 

For the condition of the equipment after the tests 
(see C-8.5 ). 

C-8.1 Test for Second Numeral 1 

The test is made by means of an apparatus the principle 
of which is shown in Fig. C3; the rate of discharge shall 
be reasonably uniform over the whole area of apparatus 
and shall produce a rainfall of between 3 mm and 5 
mm of water per minute (In the case of an apparatus 



according to Fig. C2, this corresponds to a fall in water 
level of 3 mm to 5 mm per minute). 

The equipment under test is placed in its normal operating 
position under the test apparatus, the base of which shall 
be larger than that of the equipment under test. Except 
for equipment designed for wall or ceiling mounting, the 
support for the equipment under test should be smaller 
than the base of the equipment. 

Equipment normally fixed to a wall or ceiling is fixed in 
its normal position of use to a wooden board having 
dimensions which are equal to those of that surface of 
the equipment which is in contact with the wall or ceiling 
when the equipment is mounted as in normal use. 

The duration of the test shall be 10 min. 

C-8,2 Test for Second Numeral 2 

The test apparatus-is the same as that specified in C-8.1 
and is adjusted to give the same rate of discharge. 

The equipment is tested for 2.5 min in each of four fixed 
positions of tilt. These positions are 15° either side of 
the vertical in two mutually perpendicular planes. 

The total duration of the test shall be 10 min. 

C-8.3 Test for Second Numeral 3 

The test shall be made using test apparatus such as is 
shown in Fig, C3, provided that the dimensions and shape 
of the equipment to be tested are such that it will fit within 
the radius of the oscillating tube as shown. Where this 
condition cannot be fulfilled, a hand-held spray device, 
as shown in Fig. C4, shall be used. 

a) Coniditions when using test apparatus as in 
Fig. C-3. 

The water pressure is adjusted to give a delivery rate 
of at least 10 1/min. 



Water pressure — 
approximately. 



80 kN/m 2 (0.8 bar) 



Method — The oscillating tube shall be provided 
with spray holes over an arc of 60° either side of the 
centre point and shall be fixed in a vertical position; 
the equipment tested is mounted on a turntable with 
a vertical axis and is located at approximately the 
centre point of the semi-circle. The turntable is 



24 



IS 10027 : 2000 



rotating at a convenient speed so that all parts of 
the equipment are wetted during the test. 

The minimum test duration shall be 10 min. 

When it is not practicable to rotate the equipment 
on a turntable, it shall be placed at the centre of the 
semi-circle and the tube shall be oscillated through 
an angle of 60 either side of the vertical position at 
a rate of approximately 60°/s for 5 min. The 
equipment is then turned through a horizontal angle 
of 90° and the test continued for a further period of 
5 min, 

b) Conditions when using test apparatus as in 
Fig. C4. 

The counter balanced shield shall be in place for 

this test. 

The water pressure is adjusted to give a delivery 
rate of 1 1/min + 0.5 1 /min (pressure approximately 



80-100 kN/m 2 (0.8-1.0 bar). 

The test duration shall be 1 min/mm 2 of calculated 
surface area v>f the enclosure (excluding any 
mounting surface) with a minimum duration of 
5 min. 

NOTI: — For the purpose of this test, the surface area of the 
equipment is calculated with an accuracy of ± 10 percent. 

C-8.4 Test for Second Numeral 4 

The conditions for deciding whether the apparatus of 
Fig. C3 or that of Fig. C4 should be used are the same 
as those stated in C-8.3. 

a) Using the apparatus of Fig. C3 

The oscillating tube shall have holes drilled over 
the whole 1 80° of the semi-circle. The test duration, 
rate of oscillation and water pressure are as given 
in C-8.3 (a). 




Equipment 
under teat 




Layers of sand and gravel to regulate flow of water, 
these layer* being aeparated by metallic gauze and 
blotting paper 

ononnn nor>nnrmnnno 



mmmmmmmm 



W«WftM«S«^rf3aft<i££9<<«^ 




FlO. C2 Al't.^-t'.! :' FOR Till- VURIHCATION OF PROTECTION AGAINST DRIPPING WATER 

25' 



IS 10027 : 2000 




2 



Counterweight 

Fig. C3 Apparatus for the Verification of Protection Against Spraying and Splashing Water 



Hose 



Moving shield 



Equipment under test 

77777777777777777777777 




Olemeter of holes 0,5 



Dimensions in millimetres. 

121 holes of $ 0.5: 

1 hole at the centre 

2 inner ericles of 12 holes at 30° pitch 



Viewed according to arrow A (with shield removed) 

4 outer circles of 24 holes at 15° pitch 
Moving shield — Aluminium 
Spray nozzle — Brass 



Fig. C4 Hand-Held Apparatus for the Verification of Ppotection Against Spraying and 

Splashing Water 



26 



IS 10027 : 2000 



The support for the equipment under test shall be 
perforated so as to avoid acting as a baffle and the 
equipment shall be sprayed from every direction 
by oscillating the tube to the limit of its travel in 
each direction. 

b) Using the apparatus of Fig. C4. 

The counter balanced shield is removed from the 
spray nozzle and the equipment is sprayed from all 
practicable direction. 

The rate of water delivery and the spraying time 
per unit area shall be as specified in C-8.3(b). 

C-8.5 State of the Equipment after the Tests 

After testing in accordance with the appropriate 
requirements of C-8.1 to C-8.4 the external surfaces 
should be dried, and then the equipment shall be 

inspected for ingress of water. 

The evaluation of harmful ingress of water depends on 



the dimensions of the equipment, and it is not possible 
to establish a general method suitable for all types of 
enclosures. 

For C-8. 1 to C-8.4 if any water has entered, it shall not: 

- be sufficient to interfere with satisfactory 
operation of the equipment; 

- reach live parts or windings not designed to 
operate when wet; and 

- accumulate near the conduit hole (cable entry) 
or enter the cable. 

Where the water ingress could raise doubts as to the 
functioning of the equipment a dielectric test with 
reduced value shall be effected (for example, a minimum 
of 50 percent of the dielectric test voltage). If the 
equipment is provided with drain holes it shall be proved 
by inspection that any water which enters does not 
accumulate and that it drains away without doing any 
harm to the equipment. 



ANNEX D 
{Clause 2.0) 

LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 



IS No. 

1885 (Part 17): 1979 

2086: 1993 



1353 : 1985 



Title 

Eiectrotechnical vocabu- 
lary: Part 1 7 Switchgear and 
Controlgear {First revision) 

Carriers and bases used in 
rewirable type electric fuses 
for voltages upto 650 V 
{ihird revision) 

Guide for uniform system of 
making and identification of 
conductors and apparatus 

terminals 



IS No. 
12063 : 1987 



13947 

(Part 1) 
(Part 3) 



1993 



1993 



Title 

Classification of degrees of 
protection provided by 
enclosures of electrical 
equipment 

Low-voltage switchgear and 
controlgear: 

General rules 

Switches, disconnector, 
switch disconnectors and 
fuse-combination units 



27 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and 
attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically* a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue 
of 'BIS Handbook' and ' Standards: Monthly Additions ' . 

t 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc: No.ET 07 ( 4030 ). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



AmendNo. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 
Telephones: 323 0131, 323 3375, 323 94 02 

Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 
Southern : Ci.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 1 1 3 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Telegrams: Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

323 76 17, 323 38 41 



r337 84 99,337 85 61 
1337 86 26,337 9120 



(! 



r60 38 43 

.60 20 25 
f235 02 16,235 04 42 
1235 15 19, 235 23 15 



f832 92 95, 832 78 58 
1832 78 91,832 78 92 



Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi 



