**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10028-3 (1981) : Code of practice for selection, 
installation and maintenance of transformers. Part 3: 
Maintenance [ETD 16: Transformers] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 1 100Z8 (Part III) - 1981 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

SELECTION, INSTALLATION AND 

MAINTENANCE OF TRANSFORMERS 

PART III MAINTENANCE 

Foi/rin Reprint APRIL 1997 
( Inuorporaling Amendment ^o. 1 ) 



UDC 621-314-21-7 



© Copyright l«i97 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHAUUR SHAH ZAFAR MARC 
NBW DELHI ) P0002 

Cr 6 May 1982 



Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

SELECTION, INSTALLATION AND 

MAINTENANCE OF TRANSFORMERS 

PART fri MAINTENANCE 

Code of PratJticc for Power Installation and Maintenance Sectional 
Comroittee, ETDC 20 

Chatrman Rtpnuntvii 

Shu K. K. Bow The Galcutu Electric Supply Gorporation Ltd, 

Calcutta 

Mtmbtn 

Shhi a. Chatter;es ( AlimmH to 
Shn K.K.Bott) 

Shri B. G, Alva KarnAtaka £l<^ctncity Board, Bangalore 

Shri T.N.H. Rao ( Alitrnalt ) 

SiiRi M.J. Akahdxuurthy Chief Elccuical Inspector to the Governincnt of 

Tamil Naduj Madras 
El-»G71llCAt In»p»ctoii 
( FlCRMCAl. ) TO THE 
GOV£RN|IXNT OfTaMII. NaDU 

( Alternate ) 

Shki p. D Baoadb T^ta ConiuUing Engineers, Bombay 

Sunt R. C. Bajpas ( Alurmu ) 

Shki V, S. BaATiA Siemnu India Limited, Bombay 

Shai K. K. Pant ( AUnnait) 

Shri K. V. Gmavbal The Federation of Electric:! trt^ndertakinga of India, 

Bombay 
Shri K. S. Joshi ( AlttmaU ) 
C^fmr E^I01^EBK ( Elec )-I Central Public Works Department, Nevv Delhi 

SuavKYoa OP Works ( El£c)~1 
( AlUmaU ) 

Shri Rane5 Ray Chouohi/ri Engineering Conatruttion Corporatioii limited^ 

Bombay 
Shri L.E.P, Gftta (Aittrnaie J 

Chikf Electrical Engi^^bsr Railway Boardi Miniitry of RaQwayi 

Depurv Dirsctor Standards 
( El«c )-I V. RD30 ( AiUrnaU ) 

( ConttnuMd pn pagn 2) 



^ Copywigkt 1962 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
rhift publication U protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 195?) atid 
reproduction in whole or in pert by eny meani except with written pemnuion of the 
^ubUsber thall be deemed to be ao infrinfement of copyritbt onder th» utd Att. 



IS : 10028 ( Part lU)- 1981 

( Continutd from page I ) 

Mtmbers Rtprumting 

SuRi Dftvs,Tit3ftA Math Lancn & Toubro Ltd, Bombay 

SHftJ T.P.R. SAftHA ( AUematt) 

Shri B.L. Deshpancb EiectricaJ Engineer to the Government of 

MaharaJhtra^ Bomba/ 

Shbi K. V. Dhariiadhikari Jyoii Ltd, Vadodara 

Shai D- J. Haitak Maharajhtra State Electncily Board, Bombay 

MbubeR ( Hyi>ro-£uectric ] Central Etcctricily Authority, New Delhi 

DiBECTOR ( HED )1 ( AUernaU ) 

Shri D. R. Neelappa Reddy NGEF Limited, Bangilorc 

Shri CS-fST. Muathv ( AUermU) 

Shri K.P R. Pillai Fact Engineering and Design Organization, Udyoga- 

man da 1 
Shri G.R.R. Memon ( AUtrnaU ) 

Lt-Gol B.B. Rajtal Engineer-in -Chief's Branch, Army Headquartcn 

( Mmwtry &f Dtftncc ) 
Shu S. K. Shahoaai { Alternate) 

Sbri B. M. Sahant The Bombay Electric Supply aacLTransport Under- 

taking, Bombay 
SttRl S. R. UoRANKAR ( Alunau ) 

Sum I. C. Sa^oer Dtlhi Electric Supply Undertaking, New Delhi 

Shai p. S, Sawhney ( Alternate ] 
Shrj P* K. Saxena Rural Electrification Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri G. L. Dua ( Alttrnate ] 
Shri SavdUl SiNOH Chief Electrical Irupector fo th« Gav^)f^WDt of 

Punjab, Chandigarh 

Shri D, S, Uppal ( AUematt ) 

Shri V. Sathyanathati Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Madraa 

Sh>i S. Kruhn ar aj ( Alternate ) 

Shri R. Satyabal Tanff Advisory Commmce, General f naurancc Asao 

ciation oi India, Bombay 
Shri K. K. Mandal ( Alternate ] 
Dr T, C. SiDrtAH ChicT Elcctncal Inspector to the Government of 

Kerala, Tiivandrum 

Shri K. S. SuBR<tHUANiYAu Bhar»t Heavy Electncals Ltd, Secundcrabad 

Shri G. P. Pahwa ( Atternatt ) 

Shri G- N.Thadani Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 

Shri S. G. Goehale ( Attemal$) 

Shri S. Vaidyanatham Kerala State ElcclncUy Board, Tnvandrum 

Shri R. Varadarajan ( Alttrnate) 
SuRl S. p. Sachdrv, Director GenetaJ, ISJ ( Ejco^tic Member ) 

Director ( Etcc tech J 

Secretary 

SuRi K. GANcaa 

A»i slant Director ( E(ec tech ), TST 

( Cuntmutd m pagn 72.) 



IS: 10018 (Part III) -1981 

( OtUiitmiftm pmgi Z ) 

Panel for Selection, rnstallatjon and Maintenance of 
Transformers, ETDC 20/P24 

QMB<Mf Repr^wttwg 

Shri C. R« Vamib« Grompton Grcavet Limited, Bombay 

Mtmbert 

Shki S. V. MAfftKiKAB ( AlUrJutte to 
Shri C. R. Vari<r ) 

Smi M. M. Bandbs Maharashtra Stale Electriciiy Board, Bombay 

GHnr BHOiNsaa ( Euo )-I Central Public Worki Department, New Dcltu 

Shai a. Mazvmdaji ( AlumvU ) 

Shki T. K, Orosk Calcutta Electric Supply Corporation Ltd, Catcut t» 

SHtttG. Chatterju ( Aiunuif ] 
Smi M. M. JoAo VoJtas Limited, Bombay 

Shjli N. R. Santhanah Tata Coninliing Engineers Bombay 

Stnu M, N. Bxvj^T ( Atttrwlt ) 

Shri P. S. SAWBMav Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking, New Delhi 

Smi P. D. Shaama ( AlttFftati) 

StmoK Mamaqer Dkv (E) Bhatat Heavy KlectiicaU Limited, Secunderabad 

Shri D. P. Gupta ( Allmatt ] 

Shri T. Oukuwar NCEF Limited* Bangalore 

SuKi K. V. Jayadrv ( AliemiU ) 

Shri L N. Tuvkral Haryana State Electricity Board, Chandigarh 

Shri J. L. A«ora ( Aitefnau ) 



22 



IS:tMU(Ptrtni}-198i 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

SELECTION, INSTALLATION AND 

MAINTENACE OF TRANSFORMERS 

PART III MAINTENANCE 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard (Part I[I) was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 25 November 1981, after the draft flnairzed by the Code of 
Practice for Power Instillation and Maintenance Sectional Committee had 
been approved by the ElcctrotechnicaL Division Council. 

0.2 The code of practice on installation and maintenance of transformers 
was originally published in 1961 as IS : 1886, intended as a guide to 
installation engineers, contractors and others eagaged lu the Installation 
and maintenance of power and distribution transformers. It was made up 
to date subsequently in 1967, with additional details regarding internal 
inspection of transformers. Apart from the information concerning 
transformers themselves, the code covered ancillj.ry work, such as ventila- 
tion, cabling and isolation of transformers. 

0,3 The present version of the code is being brought about to include 
additional details on criteria for selection of transformers, transportation 
to the point ofinstallation, taking into view also the latest thinking on the 
methods of supervision and maintenance of insulating oils in service. 
Specific details on maintenance aspects of special purpose tra'nsformers are 
intended to be added at a later date. 

0.4 This standard closely follows the earlier version thougn currently being 
presented in three pans mamly in order to identify information and to 
consolidate them in functionally coherent sections. This standard is hence 
brought out in three parts, viz; 

Part I Selection {under preparation) 

Part II Installation 

Part III Mainienance 

These parts shall be read in conjunction with each other. This standard 
(Part III) partly supersedes the provisions of IS : 1886-1967* which will 
be withdrawn when all the parts are made available. 

*Gode of pracuce for lostAliacIoa and maiatenance of traniformeii {first rwvtiim). 



IS: 10028 (Part 11!) -1981 

0.5 In view oi' the consideration of this code required to be in conformity 
with the prevailing statutory regulations in the country, reference to ihe 
relevant provisions of the Indian Electricity Rules, 1956 has been made at 
the appropriate places. 

0.6 In the preparation of this standard, considerable assistance has been 
derived from the following; 

IS ; 6600-1972 Guide for loading of ojl-immersed transformers 

IS ; 8478-1977 Application guide for onload tap-changers 

IS : 4146-1967 A.pp|jc;ition guide for voltage transformers 

IS : 4201-1967 ApplicatJon guide for current transformers 

Specification for Power and Distribution Transformers, Section K, 
Erection, Maintenance and Commissioning Manual, issued by the 
Central Board of Irrigation and Power. 

0,7 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the ftaal value, observed or calculated, express- 
ing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS : 2-1960*, The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be th« same as that of the specified value m this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard (Part III) covers guidance on maintenance of distribu- 
tion and power transformers covered by 15:1180-19641 and IS : 2026 
( Parts I to IV )-1977{ respectively. 

1.2 Special purpose transformers, such as gas cooled, synthetic, liquid 
insulated, dry type and mining transformers and instrument transformers 
are excluded from the scope of this code add in all such cases, the manu- 
facturer's instructions shall be followed. 

r TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this code, the definitions given in IS : 1180-19641 
and IS : 2026 ( Part I M977:, shall apply. 

•Rulcafor rounding off numerical values ( nviseti) 

i' Specification for outdoor type three-phase distribution tranaformcn up to and inclu- 
ding 100 kVA llkV (r«tiW). 

JSpccification for power transformers ' 
Fart r General (Jirsi rtvtsicu ). 
Part II Temper ature-nse (firsi rttuiwi )» 
Part 111 Insulation level and dielectric tests f fim rn /"won > 
Part IV Terminal marking, tappings and connecters ( T^rif miiion ). 



IS: 10028 (Part III)' 1981 

3. GENERAL INFORMATION 

3.1 As compared with most electric apparatus, transformers require relati- 
vely little attention The extent of the inspection and maintenance required 
wr![ be governed by the ^izc, importance of service continuity, the location 
on the system, and operating conditions, such as ambient temperature, 
unusually dirty atmosphere, heavy fogs and water supply { m the case of 
water-cooled units ). The supply authority shall be consulted if heavy loads 
on single phase or unbaliinced Jojds are to be connected. 

3.2 Distribution transformers and small power transformers ordinarily 
require and receive less attention than large transformers which represent a 
much greater investment However, small transformers sometimes supply 
power to industna! loads where convinuity of service \% of the utmost 
importance. In these cases, a greater degree of attention is justified, 

3.3 The suggestions in the following pages should prove helpful to 
operators. Full information on installation and operation are contained 
m the instructions sent with each transformer and are referred to on the 

transformer nameplate. 

3.4 Generally the causes of breakdown of transformers may be classified 
as follows: 

a) Faulty design or construction, 

b) Incorrect installation or use, 

c) Overload and peculiarity of loading conditions, 

d) Neglect, 

e) Wear and tear and other deterioration, 

f) Accidents, and 

g) Failure of auxiliary equipment. 

3.4.1 A rigid system of inspection and preventive maintenance will ensure 
long life, trouble-free service and low maintenance cost. Maintenance 
shall consist of regular inspection, testing and reconditioning, where 
necessary. The amount of attention and maintenance vary with the 
service conditions and load cycle of the transformers. 

3.4.2 Records shall be kept of each transformer giving details of all 
inspections and testing made and of unusual occurrences, 

3.4.3 The principal object of maintenance is to maintain the insulation 
m good condition. Moisture, dirt and excessive heat in contact with 
oxygen, are the main causes of insulation deterioration and avoidance of 
these will, in general, keep the insulation In good condition. The 
limiting factor is the ageing of the insulation and decline in the quality of 
the insulation during the ageing process due to chemical and physical 
effects. The decay of the msulation follows the chemical reaction rate, and 



15^0028 (Part III)* 1981 

ia case of oil-immersed transfonners, if the sustained operating temperature 
of the iasulatiou exceeds the normal operatmft temperature ^f ^S*C^ 
tliere will be a shortening of the life of the transformer. 

4, FACTOHS AFFECTING THE UFE OF A TRANSFORMER 

4.1 Effect of Moistuf c — Transformer oil readily absorbs moisture from 
the air. The effect of water jn solution in the oil is to decrease the die- 
electric strength of the oil as well as of the insulating paper which absorbs 
and stores the moisture due to higher affinity of water to paper over oil. 
All possible preventive steps should, therefore, be taken to guard against 
moisture penetration to the inside of the transformers. This wid include 
blocking of all openings for free access of air in storage and frequent 
reactivation of breathers in service. 

4J Effect of OKj^en — Oxygen may bo present inside the transformer due 
to air remain mg in oil, air pockets trapped in the windings, etc. The 
oxygen reacts on the cellulose of the insulation and the decomposition 
products of the cellulose lead to the formation of organic acids soluble in 
oil and sludge which blocks the free circulation of the oil: The adverse 
'effect of oxygen, which may be aggravated by catalytic action between hot 
oil and bare copper, increase the operating temperature. 

O Effect of Solid Impurities — The dielectric strength of oil is diminished 
appreciably by minute quantities of sohd impurities present in ike oil New 
transformers may contain particles of insulating materials and other solid 
^'mpurities. It is, therefore, a good practice to filter the oil after it has been 
in service for a short timcj especially for the units of higher voltage class. 

4.4 Effect of Varnishes— Some varnishes particularly of the oxidizing type, 
enter readily in reaction wuK transformer oil and precipitate sludge on the 
windings. Synthetic varnishes having acid inhibitmg properties generally 
delay the natural formation of acid and sludge in the oil. This should be 
borne in mind by the maintenance engineer when rewinding and replacing 
the coils during repairs to transformers. 

4.5 Effect of Slackness of Windings ~ Slackness of windmgs may cause a 
iiilu re due to repeated movement of coils which may wear the conductor 
insulation at some places and lead to an inter- turn failure. The coiTs may 
also get displaced under load conditions or momentary short circuit which 
may cause electric and magnetic unbalance and produce even greater 
displacement. It is, therefore, a good practice to lift the core and windings 
of a transformer and take up any slackness which may have developed by 
tightening tfie tie-rods or pressure screws where provided for this purpose 
at the hrst inspection. In all cases the instructions given by the manu- 
facturers should be followed closely. However, the maintenance schedules 
given in Tables 1 and 2 are recommended to serve as a general guidance, 
Additional maintenance attention should be giveti where transformers are 
working under abnormal conditions. 



IS: 10038 (Parfm)*l9ai 

5. MAINTENANCE PROCEDURE 

5.1 Safety Precaatloiis — Arrangemeats shall be made to carry out the 
maintenance of traniformers in safety. Before starting any mainteaaoce 
work the transfonners shall be isolated from the supply and the terminals 
earthed. Oil level shall always be borne in mind when undoing nats and 
bolts and before unsealing the tank. No fire shall be kept near the trBOS- 
formcr while maintenance work is going on. 

5.2 on 

5.2.1 Transformer oil is subject to deterioration or contamination in 
storage and in service. Accordingly, a periodic treatment to maintain it in 
fit condition ii required, and eventually, it may have to be replaced by 
new oil. The causes of oil deterioration and recommendations for various 
tests arc comprehensively covered in IS : IS66-197S*^ Reference shall be 
made to the same regardmg the maintenance of quality of oil in service. 
The few short tips given below may serve as ready reference. 

5.2.2 The oil level should be checked at frequent intervals and any 
excessive leakage of oil investigated. There may be slight loss of oil by 
evaporation, this need cause no concern if the tank is topped up at regular 
intervals. 

5.2.3 All teaks should be repaired as quickly as possible so as to avoid 
possible trouble caused by low oil level. 

5.2.4 Oil for toppling up should comply with IS : 33S-1972t and should 
preferably be from the same source as the original oil because the oil refined 
from different crudes may not be completely miscible and may separate into 
layers. Furthermore, there may be a greater tendency to form acidity or 
sludge in a mixture than in an oil from a single source of supply. Used 
oil shall not be mixed. New oil may be added as make up only, not 
exceeding about 10 percent. It is desirable not to mix oil taken from a 
transformer with that from switchgcar equipment 

5.2.5 Samples of the oil should be taken at regular intervals and tested. 

5.2.6 It may be mentioned that the dielectric strength does not give a 
true indication of the deteriorated condition of the oil. Even an oil which 
is highly deteriorated may give a high dielectric strength, if dry. Normal 
method of oil puriiication only maitain the dielectric strength » but do not 
give indication of the deteriorated condition of the oil. It is» therefore, 
inadvisable^ to rely solely on the dielectric strength of the oil by periodic 
tests. In addition to chemical tests other tests as given in IS : 1866'1978* 
should also be carried out. 

•Code of practice for jnaintcnADcc and supervision or iniulating oil in service (jlrjt 
nntuH ) . 

tSpectfication for new iiuutadng oiU for traiuTormcn uid iwitchgear ( mmd fmtitm ). 



IS:10028(Partm)-198l 

5J.7 It is recommended that the oil be kept under observation for 
acidity. If the acidity js increasing rapidly, or exceeds limits the cover should 
be removed to ascertain the condition of the interior of the tank and of 
the core and windings. Oil should be treated or discarded, if sludge or 
corrosion is evident. Advice should be obtained from the manufacturer. 

5.2.8 It may be noted that reconditioning by centrifugal separation of 
filtration does not remove the acidity from the oil but will remove sludge, 
dust, dirt, etc, and will tend to retard the process of deterioration. 

5.2.9 Filters with fullers earth will help to reduce acidity m the oils and 
in addition improve the resistivity. 

5.3 Rollen 

5.3.1 After a transformer has been in service for a long period, rollers 
should be e^iamined carefully. They should be greased. 

5.4 TTusfoviiieT Body 

5.4.1 The transformer tank and other parts should be inspected periodi- 
cally for any rust or leak. Rusted portions, if any, should be cleaned 
thoroughly and rcpamtcd with proper points. Transformer should be 
completely painted at proper intervals* If any leak is found, it should bo 
investigated. If it is due to defective welding, the same should be rectified 
aAer consulting the manufacturers. Leakmg joints can be rectified by 
tightening the bolts to the correct pressure or by replacing the gaskets. 

5.4.J Internal Inspection 

5.4.2.0 The core and windings should be lifted from the tank, only 
if necessary* in suitable conditions. . The surrounding atmosphere should 
not bo humid and should be free from dust, dirt, etc. Suitable lifting 
device depending on the weight of the core and coil should be arranged. 
Before disturbing anything, the insulation resistance of the transformer 
should be measured. 

5.4.2.1 Opening the Transformer — The tank contains oil with oil 
vapour and therefore care should be taken to prevent a fire. Naked lights 
and flames should be kept well away while the tank is open. If an inspection 
lamp is required, only a protected electric lamp, preferably an extra low 
voltage lamp should be used. The lamp should be kept off when not in 
use. 

Before opening the tank cover, it should be properly cleaned removing 
any dust, moisture, etc, from the top. The persons opening the tank cover 
should not have anything in their breast pocket and should not wear a 
watch or ring. The spanner should be clean of all metal fillings and should 
be held by a cotton strap or string tied securely round the waist or wrist of 



IS : 10028 ( Part UI)- 1981 

the person opening the tank cover. Cast iron spanners should not be used 
as they may break and fM inside the tank. All nuts and bolts, etc, should 
be removed from top of the cover before removing it 

SAX2 Removing the Cover ^ Tht method of removing the cover 
depends on the construction of the transformer. If the core and windings 
are separate from the cover and if there are bushings mounted on top, then 
first bushings should be dismounted and stored carefully and then the 
cover should be carefully removed. If however, the core and windings are 
suspended from the tank cover, substantial hftmg lugs, usually in the form 
of eye bolts, are provided on the cover. While lifting the cores from the 
eye-bolts care should be taken that the core is removed vertically. It 
should also be ensured that spanners or other tools used in connection 
with the work are not dropped into or left inside the tank. 

5.5 Con and Winding 

5.5.1 Lifting the Core and Coils — The core and coils, if not suspended 
from the cover, arc held in the tank by a bolt or other suitable fixing 
devices at each end near the top. These should first be removed If there 
are bushings provided on the tank walls, these should also be removed by 
undoing the connection Mechanical connection to the tap changing 
switch handle, if provided, should be removed. 

5.5.1.1 The core and cojIs should then bebfted vertically by shnging 
It from the liftmg lugs provided on the core, making sure that the sling 
does not foul against bushing connections, tapping switch, etc, as it p IK 
tight. 

5.5*1.2 After allowing the core and coils to drain into the tank, fcr 
some time» they should be lowered preferably on beams placed in a metal 
tray filled with saw dust or sand. 

5.5.2 Inspection ^ After removing the core and coils from the tank, the 
following should be carefully checked making sure that nothing is disturbed 
unnecessarily and that the leads are not pulled out of their places unless they 
are unsatisfactory: 

a) AU bolts and nuts should bo adequately tight. If they are too 
tight clamps, etc, may bend. 

b) The coiis should be clean and free from sludge. Slight traces ot 
sludges should be cleaned by transformer oil. But if there are 
heavy deposits, it is likely that the ducts are blocked. In such 
a case the matter should be referred to the manufacturer. 

c) The windings should be firmly clamped without any movements. 
There should be no loose spacers or end blocks. If loose wmdmgs 
or spacers are noticed, the vertical tie-bars which put pressure on 



IS : 10028 ( Part m } - 1981 

the coil stacks should be adjusted. Special coil adjustment bolts 

if provided should also be tightened properly. 
d) Proper operation of tap changing switch may also be checked, 
c) All connections should be tight and clear 

f ) If the insulation resistance tests done before untanking g^ve low 
value, it should be repeated. If now the test gives satisfactory 
value, the low value is attributed to some otber cause. However, 
jf the test stiJI gjves Jow value, the manufacturers should be 
informed, 

g) If there is sludge deposition at the bottom of the taak» it should 
be removed while filtering the oil. 

5.5.3 It is recommended that the core and wiadiog be cemoved from the 
tank for visual inspection as per time schedule given io the inspection table. 
The windings should be examined to ensure that no sludge has been deposi- 
ted bloclcirig the oil ducts. Any loose nuts and bolts should be tightened, 

5.5.4 Before liftjog the core and wtndmg from the Uhk^ it is usually 
necessary to disconnect the windmgs from the bushings are cable boxes 
inside the tank to disconnect the ofT-circuit tap switch handle or leads of 
the on-load tap changer and to remove any earthmg strips between the core 
clamps and the tank. 

5.5.5 The core and windings shall be removed with great care. It should 
be placed under cover and m a dry place. 

5.6 Bushings 

S.6 1 Clean t|ie bushing porcelains and examine them for cracks and 
chips. Vety slight chips may be ignored but any serious damage will 
require a new porcelain which must be obtaind from the manufacturer. 
It is recommeaded to have a spare m stock. 

5.6.1.1 In some cases the porcelain only may be changed while in 
other cases the conducting rod is cemented into the porcelain and the 
complete bushing requires to be changed. 

5.6.1.2 If the bushing is below oil level, the oil should be lowered 
until it is below the bushmg hole. 

5.6.t.3 If only the porcelain is supplied it may not be necessary to 
undo thti mternal bushing connection, for, in some cases the bushing stems 
are joined by an msuJated bar to prevent them from iurnieig when the nuts 
are undone. All the nuts at the top of the bushmg should "be removed and 
the old porcelain lifted straight up over the central stem which remajns m 
place. Slide the new porcelain down over the stem and replace the nuts. 
Too much strain on the porcelain should not be appJied when Ughtening 
the connections. Change on V one porcelain at a time, replacing the nuts 

10 



IS:10028(PaitIH)-19M 

at tbe top of tbe stem befor removing those on the next bushing. If the 
insulated bar between the bushing stems is not provided, the internal 
connections should be undone and the whole bushing removed berore the 
porcelain is changed. 

5.6.1.4 When a complete bushing is supplied the internal connection 
to the bushing should be undone. If the replacement bushing has a socket 
at the bottom end, the old bushing should be undamped and withdrawn 
from the tanlc^ the internal lead being flexible and long enough to allow 
this. This lead may now be unplugged from the old bushing and plugged 
into the new one, which is then lowered into the hole in the tank and rec- 
lamped firmly but not too tightly. 

5.7 Cable Boxes 

5,7,1 The seating arrangements for filling holes should be checked each 
year. When screwed plugs are seated with a bituminous cflmpound, the 
compound should be examined for cracks. If the compound has cracked it 
should be replaced as the cracks may lead to an accumulation of water 
around the plug, Gasketed joints should be examined and tightened 
whenever required, 

5.8 ExtBnial Connections 

5.8.1 All connocttons should be tight. If they appear blackened or 
corroded, undo the connection and clean down to bright metal ^ith emery 
paper. Remake the connection and give it a heavy coating of grease. It 
is particularly important that heavy-current carrying connections should be 
properly maintamed. If the metal has the characteristic bluish tinge 
which indicates that it has been hot, then in most cases the connection 
shall not be considered satisfactory. Either it has become loose op dirty, 
or the conductor is not suitable for carrying the current. 

5.8*2 The earth connections shall be properly maintained. A small 
copper loop to bridge che top cover of the transformer and the tank may 
also be provided to avoid earthfault-current passing through the fastening 
bolts when there is a lightning surge, high-voltage surge or failure of 
bushmgs. 

5.9 Conservator and Magnetic Oil Gauge 

5.9.1 Conservators are so arranged that the lower part acts as a sump ia 
which any impurities entering the conservator will collect. A valve/plug is 
fitted at the lowest pomt of the conservator for draining and sampling. The 
inside of the conservator should be cleaned or flushed with oil every two to 
three years. A removable end is generally provided for this purpose. 

5.9.2 The oil level indicator should be kept clean. Generally the oil 
level is visible through a transparent material. In case of breakage 

11 



IS : 10028 (Part III) ^1981 

immediate replaccmeat is esscDtial. When conservator is stripped For 
cleaning, the mechanism of the oil gauge should be inspected aod cleaned. 

5.10 Breather 

5.10.0 There are generally two types of breathers used on a transformer: 

a) plain breather, and 

b) silicagel breather. 

5.10-1 The end of the plain breather should be kept clean and the 
ventilation holes free of dust. If an oil seal has been provided, the oil 
should be wiped out and replaced to the correct level. 

5.10.J Silicagel dehydrating breathers are fitted with a sight glass so that 
the colour of the crystals may be seen. The colour changes from blue to 
pmk as the crystals absorb moisture. When the crystals get saturated with 
moisture they become predominantly pmk and should therefore be reacti- 
vated. The body of the breather should be removed by undoing the nuts. 
If the crystals have been kept in an inner container, the container should 
be removed, but if they are noi^ the crystals should be removed into a 
shallow tray. The crystals should be backed at a temperature of about 
200*C until the whole mass is at this temperature and the blue colour has 
been restored. Clean the breather and replace the dry crystals and rentw 
the oil m the sealing cup at the bottom. 

5.11 Buchholt? Rela> 

5.11.1 Routine operatioa and mechanical inspection tests should be 
carried out at one and two yearly intervals respectively, 

5.11.2 During operation if gas is found to be collecting and giving alarm, 
the gas should be tested and analysed to find out the nature of fault. 
Sometimes, it may he noticed that the gas collecting is only air. The 
reasons for this may be that the oil is releasing any absorbed air due to 
change in temperature or due to leakage on the suction side of the pump. 
The absorbed air is released m initial stages only when no vacuum is 
applied during filling of oil The internal faults can be identified to a great 
extent by a chemical analysis of gas. 

5.11.3 Buchholtz niay also give alarm/trip due to the oil level falling 
below the Buchholtz level. 

5.12 Explosion Vent 

5.12.1 The diaphragm, whjch js Jitted at the exposed end of the vent 
should be mspectcd at frequent intervals and replaced* if damaged. Fadure 
to replace the diaphtittgm quickly may allow the ingress of moisture Vvhich 
wi/l contaminate the oil. JUhc diaphragm has brokefi because of a fault 

12 



IS : 10028 ( Part m)- 1981 

in the transformer, an inspection shall be carried out to determine the 
nature and cause oF the fault. 

5.13 Gaskets 

5.13.1 Gaskets sometimes shrink during service. It is, therefore, neces- 
sary to check the tightness of all bolts fastening gasketed joints. The bolts 
should be tightened evenly round the joints to avoid uneven pressure. 
Leaking gaskets should be replaced as soon as the circumstances permit. 

5.14 Small Pipe Work 

5.14.1 The pipe work should be inspected at least once a year. Leaks 
may be due to slack unions, which should te tightened or to badly seated 
joints caused by a misalignment. In the latter case, the pipes should be 
aligned and joints remade. 

5.15 Temperature Indicators 

5J5,l \i each yearly maintenance mspcction, the level of oil in the 
packets holdmg thermometer bulbs should be checked and the oil replcai- 
shed, if required. The capillary tubmg should be fastened down again if 
it has become loose. Dial glasses should be kept clear and if broken, 
replaced as soon as possible to prevent damage to the instrument. Tempe- 
rature indicators should be calibrated with standard thermometer immersed 
in hot oil bath if found to be reading incorrectly. 

5,lti Coolers aDd Cooling Fans 

5.16.1 There is a variety of coolers. For radiator type coolers, mainte- 
na.noQ pnmanly consists of replacing damaged elements, cleaning the outer 
surface to remove settled dust, repainting, etc. 

5.16.2 Fan blades are cleaned to remove dust. Bearings of the fan 
motors should be lubricated occasionally. Grease should not be a.dded 
while the motor is running. For other coolers, manufacturers, instructions 
should be followed. Other precautionary measures, such as checking of 
correct operation of pumps, gauges, indicators and differential pressure 
between oil and water ( in case of water-coolers ) shall be taken. 

5.17 Oa-Lofld Tap Changer 

5,17.1 Since all on-load tap changers are not of the same design and 
construction, special instructions of manufacturer's should be followed. 
However, a few points are enumerated: 

a) DiverUr Switch — The maintenance primarily consists of servicing of 
diverter switch contacts, checking the oil level in the divertcr 
switch chamber, and replacement of divertcr switch oil when the 
same becomes unsuitable for further service. 

13 



IS : 10018 ( Part m)- 1981 

b) Motor Driving Mecfum^m 

\. Do not allow dirt to accumulate between contact rings of notching 
controller. 

2. Do not use oii/grease on contacts rings on notching controller. 

3. Check the operation of anti-condensation heater. 

4. If the contacts of contactors are silver faced, no touching up shall 
be done, but should be replaced when they arc worn out. Copper 
contacts may be lightly touched up with a file when they become 
rough. The pole faces of electromagnet shall be kept clean. 

5. Do not oil/greasc the contact surface of radial multi-contact 
switches, unless a special contact lubricant is used The space 
between the rings should be cleaned occasionally. If necessary, 
a few drops of benzine be used. 

c) Selector Switch — The contacts do not make/break current, As such, 
the wear is only due to mechanical movement of moving contacts. 
These may be inspected once in 2/3 years. 

5.18 Spares 

5.18.1 It IS a healthy practice to have essenttal spares like one member 
of each type of bushings> one spare limb winding, one thermometer, one 
cooling fan, etc, for each group of similar transformers. Suppliers' 
recommendations may be followed in this connection. 

6. MAINTENANCE SCHEDULE 

6.1 Recommended maintenance schedules for all types of transformers of 
rating less than 1 000 kVA and for ratings of I 000 kVA and above are 
given in Tables 1 and 2 respectively. The hourly and daily mspection 
lecoroTnendcd are applicable for attended siibslalions only, Hoivever, for 
unattended substations, these items should be inspected as Trequently as 
possible. 

6.3 In addition to the schedule recommended in Tables 1 and 2, it may be 
necessary to inspect for other details in the case of specific types of trans- 
formers. In all such cases, the manufacturers instructions shall be followed. 

7. TROUBLE-SHOOTING IN TRANSFORMERS 

7.1 Faults observed during the periodic maintenance schedules are to be 
rectified as per the suggested action required. However, certam chance 
troubles and major faults in performance of the transformer shall have to 
be attended to in a desired sequence, as per manufacturer's instructions or 
ready reference manuals. Guidance to manage electrical and mechanical 
troubles normally encountered in all types of transformers arc provided in 
Table X 

14 



IS: 10028 (Pirtin)-1981 



TABLE 1 ^RECOMMENDED MAINTENANCE SCHEDULE FOR TRANSTORMEIIS 
* OF CAPACnTES LESS THAN 1 000 fcVA 



Si. 
No. 



(1) 



ItJipsction 

FltE(iUENCV 



(2) 
Hourly 



Daily 



3. Monthly 



Quartrrly 
Half yearly 



Yearly 



(Clauses 4.5, 6 1 f mi 6,2) 



Items to be 
Inspected 



(3) 
i) Load (amperes) 

u) Temperature 



111) Voltage 

Dehydrating 
hreaihcr 



i) Oil level in 

transformer 

ii) CaiinccUons 
Bushings 

i) Non-conservator 
transformfr 

boxei, 

joint!, 

and 

paint 

trans- 



ii) Giiblc 
gasketcd 
gaugci 
general 

i) Oil in 
former 



ji] Earth resistance 

uij Relays^ alarms 
their circuits^ etc 



IKIPICTION 
NOTU 



(4) 

Check against rated 

hgurn 
Oil temperature and 

ambient tempem- 

tur^ 
Check against rated 

figures 
Check that air-pasi- 

•ge ate clear. 

Gncck colour of 

active agent 

Check transformer 
oil ie\'el 

Check UgKtncM 
Examine for cracks 

and dirt deposits 
Check for moisture 

under cover 
Inspect 



Check for dielectric 
strength and water 
content. Chock for 
acidity and sludge 



7. 



2 yearly 
5 yearly 



Non-conservator 
tramformcrs 



Acniof4 RzQiumiD » 
iNtpmoTioN Sbows 
UjtfATnFAfTroav 

GONDmOMI 

(5) 



If lilicagcl is pitik, 
ckangc by tptrc 
charge, The old charge 
may be reactivated for 
use again. 

If low, top up with dry 
oil. Examine trans- 
former for leaks. 

If loose^ tighten. 

Glean or replace* 



Improve 
check oil. 



ventilation, 



T&ke suitable ictioa to 
restore qulity of oU, 



Take suitable aactiont if 
earth resistance !■ high. 

Clean the components 
and repl&cc contacts 
and fuses if necestary. 
Change the setting^ if 
neccoary. 

Filter oil regardless of 
condition. 

Wash by hosing down 
with clean dry oil. 



NOTK — When inspection of core 
manufacturer be consulted. 



Examine relay and 
alaxm contacts, 

their operation, 
fustSi etc. Check 
relay accuracy, etc 

Internal inspection 

above core 
Overall inspection 

including lifting of 

core and coils 

and coils arc to be done, it is recommended the 



13 



IS : 10038 ( Part m ) - 1981 



TABLE 2 RECOMMENDED MAINTENANCE SCHEDULE FOR 
TRANSFORMERS OF CAPACrTIES OF 1 000 kVA AND ABOVE 



Clauses 4.5, 6.1 and 6.2] 



Na 


FAl(2,UftNCY 


Items to bb 
Inipectbd 


iNaPBGTiOX 

NOTIS 


AcTiori REiitflRlo IP 

Ins^ectmok Shows 

Unsatiwactohv 

CoNDinoNJ 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


1. 


Hourly 


i) Ambient tempC' 


— 


— 



Daily 



3> Q^uarterly 



mure 
ii) Winding tcmpc-l Check that tempera- Shut down the tr^ot* 
racure V rature rist is reaso- former and inv^jn* 

ill) Oil tempcratur^J n&ble gate if either ia 

persistently higher 
than normai. 
iv) Load (flmperea)' 



v) Voltage 



i) Oil level iti trans- 
former 



11} Oil level in buA- 

hitig 
iji) Leakage of w^ter 

into coder 
iv) Rclicfdiaphragm 

v] Dehydrating bre- 
ather 



M Chcc 
j figui 



Check agaiiut rated 



Check against trans- 
former oil level 



Check that air-pau* 
aga ano free. Check 
colour of active 
agent 



i) Biuhing 

ii) Oil in transfer* 
iner 

ui) Cooler faa bea- 
nnj^, motonand 
operattcg mecha- 
nisms 

iv) OLTG 



v) Indoor Iransfor- 
mcn 



Examine for cracks 
and dirl deposits 

Cheek for dielectric 
strength and water 
content 

Lubricate bearings. 
Check gear bo^, 
Examine contacts. 
Check manual coa- 
trol and interlocks 

Check oil m OLTG 
driving mccha- 

niims 

Cheek ventiJation 



If low» top up With 
dry oil, exarnme 
traniformcT for 
Leaks. 



Replace if cracked 
or broken. 

If silicaffel LS pjnk, 
change by spare 
charge. Th« old 
charge may be 
reactivated for use 
again. 

Clean or replace. 

Take suitable action 

to restore quality of 

oil. 
Replace burnt or 

worn contacts or 

other parts. 



{CMHtrntd) 



16 



tS: 10028 ( Part ni)^ldgl 



TABLE 2 RECOMMENDED MAINTENANCE SCHEDULE VOR 
TRANSFORMERS OF CAPACITIES 1<I00 kVA AND ABOVE — Conid 



Sl 

No. 



(I) 



iNtPKCnON 
fBMQUtKCV 



(2) 



iTKia TO BE 

Inspected 



(3) 



4. 


Hftlf Yearly 


Oil cooler 


3. 


Yearly (or 


1} OtI in trans 




cftrlicr if, the 


mcr 




transformer 






can conveni- 






eotly be 






uken out for 






checking) 


u) OU filled ! 
hin^i 

ill) Gaiket joints 

iv) Cable boxes 



iNtPKCnON 
NOTU 



Tctt for presnjre 
Check for acidity 
and sludge 



bus- Tcit oil 



6. (a) 5 yearly 



v) Surge divericr 

and gaps 
vl) Relays, alarms, 

their circuit*, etc 



vii) Earth rciiitance 



1 000 to 3 000 iVA 



Check for sealing^ 
arrangennentA for 
filling holef. Exa- 
mine cotnpound for 
cracks 

Examine for cracks 
and dirt deposits 

Examine relay ^nd 
alarm contacts, 

theu opera tioa, 

fuid, etc. Check 
relay accuracy, etc 



AcnoN Raf^tniut) ir 
IpmrEcnoN Showi 

U N»ATnFA0rrO» V 
CONDmONI 

(5) 



Filler or replace. 



Filter or replace. 

Tighten the bolu 
evenly to avoid 
uneven prcuurc, 
Replace gu^etj^ if 
leaking. 



Clean or replace. 

Clean the compone- 
nLa and replace con- 
tacts and fusea^ if 
necessary. Change 
the setting, if nece- 
ssary. 

Take suitable action; 
if earth rcualantt u 
high. 

Wash by hosmg 
down with clean 
dry oil. 

do 

Note 1 — With respect to on-load tap cbangersj the manufacturer's recommendation 
should be followed. 

Noja 2 -^ The silicagel may be reactivated by heating it to 150 to 200** C. 

NoT£ B — Every time the drying medium is changed^ oil seal should also bechanced. 

Note 4 ■ — No work should be done on any iransfornner unless it is disconnected from 

all external circuits and the lank and all wuidings have been solidly earthed. 

Note 5 ^ In case of anything abnormal occurring during service, maker's advice 
should be obtained, giving him complete particulars as lo the nature and the eatcz^t uf 
occurrence, together with the name plate particulaia in order to assist identification. 



(b; 7-10 yearly Above 3 000 kVA 



Overall inspection 
indudmg lifting of 
core and coils 
do 



J7 



IS :100M(P«rtni)-W81 



TABU 3 TROUBLE-SHOOTING CHART FOR ALL TRANSFORMERS 

[Claustl.X) 



TftOUBLK 
(0 

Ris* in Ternptrature 
High temperatures 



Elittncal Troubles 
Winding failure 



Core failure 



Caltsb 



Over Tolt age 
Overcurrent 



High ambient tempera- 
ture* 

IjuufficLcnt cooling 

Lower liquid level 
Sludged ovl 

Short-circuued core 



Peubdy 

(3) 



Change the circuit voltage or traiu- 
former connect Joiu to avoid overexci- 
tation. 

If possible^ reduce load. Heating 
can often be reduced by improving 
power factor of load. Check para< 
llel circuiu for circuUtipg currenti 
which may be caused by improper 
ratios or impedance?. Set ElectncaJ 
Troublei, below. 

Either improve ventiJaticn or relocate 
transformer in lower ambient tempe- 
rature. 

If unit « attificmlly cooled, mftltc 
sure coohngis adequate 

Fill to proper level, 

U*ft ftUtt pTesa t^ wa&h. off cftie And 

coiU Filler oil to remove sludge- 
Test for exciting current and no-load 
losi. If high^ inspect core ^nd 
repair. Set Eltctncal Troubles, 
below. 



Lightning. Short-circuit 

Overload 

Oil of low dielectric 

strength 
Foreign ii\4lcT\gkl 
Corc-insulaiion break- 

doMfn 
(Gore, boltSj clamps, or 

between Uminaiions) 



Usually, when a transformer winding 
fails^ the transformer is automati- 
cally d]SCOnncc(cd from the power 
source by Uic opening of the supply 
bTtake? oi tvise. SnvoVtc or t^in^ 
liquid may be expelled from the 
case, accompanied by noise. When 
there is any such evidence of a 
v^inding failure, the transformer 
should not be re-cncrgized at full 
rated voltage, because this might 
result in additional internal damage. 
Abo It would introduce a fire ha^aid 
in tramformers. 
After dUconnection Tram both source 
and load, the fullowing observations 
and testa aie recommended . 
a] External mechanical or elect- 
rical damage to biubmgs, 
leadSj poihcads, disconnecting 
switches, or other accessories 

( Continiud } 



18 



rS :100M( Part ra)- 1981 



TABLE 3 TROUBLE-SHOOTING CHART FOR ALL TRANSFORMERS— Confif 



Tnotnu 

(1) 



Cause 
(2) 



EUctrical Trimbles 
High exciting current 



Incorrect volugc 



Audible iniernal arcing 
and radio interference 



Bushing fla9bovcr 



A(*chanical Troubltt 
Leakage through screw 
joinu 



r.cakagc at gasket 



Shprt-circuitcd core 



Open core joints 



Improper ratio 



Supply voltage 

Kbnormal 

Isolated metallic part 



Look connecticm 

Luw liquid level, cxpn- 
aing live parU 
Llghlning 

Dirty bushings 



RslC£DY 

(3) 
h) Level ormaulatirig liqiud m all 
compartmcntt. 

c) Temperature of in^ulatiitg 
1j quid wherever it can be 
measured . 

d) Evidence of leakage of insula* 
ting liquid or icaling comp- 
ound. 

Test core los: . If higb, it i3 probably 
due to a short-circuited core. Test 
core insulation. Repair if damaged. 
If UminatiODi are welded together, 
refer lotnanufacturcr. 

Core-loss test will show no appreci- 
able increase. Pound jolnti toge- 
ther and rciightcTi clamping 
structure 

Change Icrminal-hoard connection or 
ratio-adjiiStcr position to give 
correct voltage. 

Change tap connectloni or readjiut 
supply voltage. 

The source should be immediately 
dctrmuncd Make certain that all 
normally grounded parti arc grou- 
nded, such a5 the clamps and core. 

Same as abave Tighten all Connec- 
tions. 

Maintain proper Iiqmd level. 

Provide adequate lighimng prote- 
ction 

Glean bushing porcelaim, frequency 
depending on dirt accujaulMlion. 



material 



-1 



Make 
joints. 



Foreign 

threads 
Oval nipples 
Poor thrcadi 
1 napToper fiUcr 
Improper assettibly 
Poor scarfed joints T 

Insufficient or unc\cn J 
Compresjion ( Make li gh t 

Improper preparation of f joints, 

gaskets and gaiket [ 

surfaces J 



tight screw Joints or gaiket 



screw joints or gasket 



( Coniinttsd ) 



19 



IS : 10O28 ( Part m ) • 19S1 



TABLE 3 TROUBLBSaOOTING CHART FOR ALL TRANSFORMERS —Cmtd 



TkouBL* Cause 

(I) (2) 

Mtchanieal TrouhUs — Contd 



Leakage in welds 

Pressure -relief 

phragtn cracked 



Pressure- relief 
phragm ruptured 



dia- 



Shipping strains, imper- 
fect weld 

Improper assembly. 

Mechanical damage 



du- Internal fault 

I n conservator transfor- 
mer — obstructed oil 
flo^v or breathing 

In gas -seal transfor- 
mer^ — obstructed pre 
asure relief valve 

In scaled transformer 
— liquid level too high 



Kbuedy 

(3) 



Repair leaks in welds. 

Replace diaphragm. Inspect inside 
of pipe for evidence of rust or 
moisture. Be sure to dry out trans- 
former if there u a chance that 
drops of water may have settled 
directly on windings or other vulne- 
rable locations, aa oil teat may not 
always reveal presence of free water. 



Moisture condensation 
m open-type transfer- 
incra and airfi[fcd com- 
partments 

Moisture condensation 
m sealed transformers 

Audio noise 



Rvieting aind deterio- 
ration of paint finish 

Fractured metal or 
porcelain parts of 
bujhingj 



Improper or insufficient 
ventdatora 



Cracked diaphragm 

Moisture in oil 

Leaky gaskets and joints. 
Accessories and exter- 
nal transformer parts 
are set into resonant 
vibration giving off 
loud noise 

Abraded surfacci i^nd 
weathering 

Unusual strains placed 
on terminal connec- 
tions 



Check to see that valve between con- 
servator and tank is open and that 
ventilator on conservator is not 
blocked. 

Make certain that relief valve func- 
tions and that valves m discharge 
line arc open. 

Liquid level should be adjusted to 
that corresponding with liquid 
temperature to allow ample space 
for expansion of liquid. 

Make lure that all ventilator <'pen- 
ings ate free. 



Se$ remedies above for cracked and 
ruptured diaphragms. 
Filter Oil. 

Make certain all joints are tight. 
Tighten loose parts. In some cases 
parts may be stressed into resonant 
state. Releasing pressure and 
slumming will remedy this condi- 
tion. 

Bare Tnctal of mechanical parts 
should be covered with grease. 

Gables and bus-bars attached to 
transformer tcrminali should be 
adequately supporied. In the case 
of heavy leads^ flexible connections 
should be provided ro remove strain 
on the terminal and bushing 
porcelain. 



20 



[5:l(»0JS(FArtin)-198[ 



TABLE 3 TROUBLB-SHOOUNG CUAHT FOR AZX TKaMSPORMEIIS ~ Omfd 

TkOUBLK CaUIS RtUKDV 

CI) (2) (3) 
OU Tntihtu { ue 9iso IS : 1SG6-1978*) 

Low dielcctnc itrcngth Condenwtion iq open- Make certain chat ventilating open- 
type transfbriDcr* from ing? arc unobftmctcdt' 
improper vcnuUtion 



Broken relief diaphngm Replace diaphragmf- 
Leaks around cover Regask«t, if neeeuaryt. 



Leaky cooling coil 



Teat cooling coil and repairf . 



Badly diKOlourcd oil Contaminated by vaf Reuin oil if dielectric strength ii 



nishi 

Carbonized oi\ due to 
Switching 

Winding or rore failure 

Oxidation (iludge or Exposure to air 
acidityj 



satisfactory. 



' Wash down ' core and coils and 
tank. Filter and reclaim or replace 

oiL 



High operating tempera- Same as above. Either reduce load 
lurct or improve cooling. 

*Codc of practice for maintenance and supcrviuon of insulating oil in service {fiui 

uvimn ) . 
tin any event, filter oil or dry transformer by beating, or both, to ratore dielectric 

strength. 



21 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 11 0002 

Telephones 323 0131, 323 3375, 323 9402 

Fax 91 1 1 3234062. 91 11 3239399. 91 11 3239382 

Tefegrams Manaksanstha 

(Common 1o all Offices) 

C^ntnl LBboratory Telephone 

Plot No 20/9. sue IV. Sahibabad Industrial Area. Sahibabad 201010 877 00 32 

Regional Offices: 

Central Mar\ak Bhavan. 9 Bahadw S^ah Zafar Marg. NEW DEUH1 1 10002 323 76 1 7 

•Eastern 1 /1 4 QT Scherr^e VII M. ^ IP '^oad M^niWola, CALCUTTA 70U054 337 86 62 

Northern SCO 335-336, Seclor 34-A. CHANDIGARH 160022 60 38 43 

Southern CIT Campus, IV Cross Road. CHENNAI 6001 13 235 23 15 

1We5lem Manakalaya. E9. Behind Marol Telephone Exchange, Andheri (East), 932 92 95 
MUMBAI 400093 

Branch Office^:: 

Pushpak'. Njrmohamed Shaikh Warg, Khanpur. AHMEDABAD 3&0OQ1 550 13 48 

tPeenya Industrial Area, lit Stage. Bangalore Tunr^kur Road. 839 49 55 
BANGALORE 560058 

Gango^n Complex, bth RtM)i. Bhadbhada Road. T T Magar, BHOPAL 462003 55 40 21 

F^loi No 62 63, Unit VI, Ganga Nagar. DHUBANESHWAR 751001 40 36 27 

Kalaikathir Buildings, 670 Avinashi Road. COIMBATCRL 641037 21 01 41 

Plot No 43, Sector 16 A MathuraRoad. FARIDA0AD 1210U1 8-?ft SH 0^ 

Savitn Complex, 116 G T Road. GHA2WB AD 201001 8-71 19 96 

53/5 Ward No 29, R G Barua Road, 5th By-lane, GUWAHATt 781003 b^ 11 37 

5 8'S5C, L N Gupta Marg. Nampally Station Road. HYDERABAD 500001 20 10 83 

E 52 Chita*un|ein Marg, C-Scheme, JAfPUH 302001 37 29 £5 

11 7/416 B, Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 21 68 76 

Selh Bhawan, 2nd Floor, Behind Leela Cinema. Naval Kishore Road, 23 89 23 
LUCKNOW 226001 

NIT BUiJding, Second Floor, Gokulpat Market NAGPUR 440010 52 51 71 

Palliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 26 23 05 

institution of Engineers (India) Building 1 332 Shivaji Nagar, PUNE 41 1005 32 36 35 

TC No 14/1421, University P O Palayam THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 695034 6 21 17 



*Sales Office (s at 5 Chowringhee Approach, P O Pnncep Street. 27 10 B5 

CALCUTTA 700072 

tSales Office is at Novefty Chambers, Grant Road, MUMBA* 400007 309 65 28 

^Sales Office is at 'F' Block. Unity Building, Narashimara)a Square, 222 39 71 

BANGALORE 560002 



Piinutl dl [Xv Kjy PnniL-i\ New Dvltii liulut 



