**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10037-1 (1981) : Requirements for sludge dewatering 
equipment^ Part I: Sludge drying beds-sand, gravel and 
underdrains [CED 24: Public Health Engineering.] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 1 10037 (Parti) "1981 

( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

Indian Standard 

REQUTREMENTS FOR 
SLUDGE DEWATERING EQUIPMENT 

PART I SLUDGE DRYING BEDS— SAND, GRAVEL 

AND UNDERDRAIN5 



UDC 62a'33Ei'4l 




® Copyrighi 1982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

WfANAK BHAVAN, 9 DAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARC 

NEW DELH[ 1]0WS 



M?^ '^ 



Frtci Ri S*™ ' MoTth 1962 



IS : 10037 ( Part I ) - 1981 

Indian Standard 

REQUIREMENTS FOR 
SLUDGE DEWATERING EQUIPMENT 

PART I SLUDGE DRYING BEDS SAND, GRAVEL 
AND UNDERDRAINS 



Public Health Engineering Equipment Sectional Cominittee, BDG 40 

Chairman Representing 

Db B. 5^, SuNDAKESAX National Environmental Engineering Research 

Institute ( GSTR ), Nagpur 

Members 

Adviser ( PHE) Ministry of Works & Housing, New Delhi 

Dk S. R. Sttkla ( Alternate ) 
Shki N. S. Bhaibvan Public Healtli Engineering Department, 

Government of Kerala, Trivandrum 
Sbbi O. p. Bishnoi U. p. Jal Nigam, Lucknow 

SiiBi_S._S. SmvASTAVA ( Alternate) ^ 

Shri K. U. i\ Ghaxjdhaby lingineers India Limited, New ijelhi 

Chief EjstginBBK Department of Health, Government of West 

i^engal, Calcutta 
. Shbi T. N. GhattEkjEh: ( AUernaie ) 
Chief Ekoineer ( Water ) Municipal Corp oration^ of Delhi 

Shbi Jai Narain ( Alternate ) 
Shut D. K. Gkottdhttky Geo=Miller & Go, Calcutta 

Shri D. R. Mall ( Alternate) 
Shbi S. K. Dasqupta Calcutta Metropolitan Development Authority, 

Calcutta 
Shbi S.J. Dtttta {Alternate ) 
Deputy Municipal Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay 

Commissioner 
Hydraulic Engineer 
Chief Engineer ( SbWeragb , 
Sh&i B. R. N, Gupta ' Engineer-in-Chief's Branchs Army Headquarters, 

New Delhi 
Shri K. V, Kbishnamukthy ( Alternate ) 



. } (Alternate) 



( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10037 ( Part I ) - 19«l 

{ Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shki D. R. Jaga.nx.vth Rao Public Health Engineering Department, 

Government of Madhya Pradesh, Bhopal 
SjiKi M. G. Vaidya ( Aliernats) 
Shei R. KjaiSHis A3WAMY Tamil Nadu Water Supply & Drainage Board, 

Madras 
Shki S, a. Jaodesan ( Alternate ) 
Shbi M. Y. Madan The Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri C. E. S. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. R. Majumdkr Paterson Engineering Co ( India ) Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri L. S. Mkhta Indian Chemical Manufacturers Association, 

Bombay 
Shbi R. K. Shtjkla ( Alternate) 
Membbr-Seohetary Central Board for Prevention and Control q£ 

Water Pollution ( Ministry of Works & 
Housing ) 
Dii K. R. Rangaxatjlian ( Alternate ) 
Shki A. R. Mm Public Health Engineering Department, 

Goverment of Jdmmu & Kashmir, Srinagar 
Shri G. M. Kanth ( Alternate ) 
Shei D. V. S. Murthy M. P. State Prevention and Control of Water 

Pollution Boardj Bhopal 
Shri V. S. Bansat. {Alternate) 
Shri S. S. Naik Hydraulic & General Engineers Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri D. R. Kenkrb ( Alternate) 
Shbi R. Natarajan Hindustan Dorr Oliver Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi B. M. Rahul ( Alternate) 
Shbi S. K. Neogi Institution of Public Health Engineers India, 

Calcutta 
Shri D. K. Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. M. Patel Indian Water Works Association, Bombay 

Shri V. Ramaw National Environmental Engineering Research 

Institute ( CSIR ), Nagpur 
Shbi Y. K. Rangakaju The Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltd, Nqw 

Delhi 
Shbi A. Narayanan { Alternate ) 
Reprksentative Public Health Engineering Department, 

Government of Punjabj Chandigarh 
Representative Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Representative Public Health Engineering Department, 

Government ofHaryana 
Shbi K, K. Gandhi ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. V. Somasekhar Public Works & Electric Department, 

Government of Karnataka, Bangalore 
Prof S. Sttbha RaO All In^Un Institute of Hygiene & Public Health, 

Calcutta 
Shki A. V. Rao ( Alternate) 
Shbi S. A. Swamy The Institution of Engineers ( India), Calcutta 

Shri P. S. Tkndolkau Gaudy Filters ( India) Ltd, Bombay 



Shbi C. L. Sastri ( Alternate ) 



{ Continued on pag$ 7 ) 



IS : 10037 ( Part I ) - 1981 

Indian Standard 

REQUIREMENTS FOR 
SLUDGE DEWATERING EQUIPMENT 

PART I SLUDGE DRYING BEDS — SAND, GRAVEL 
AND UNDERDRAINS 



0. F(^ REWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part I ) was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 24 December 1981, after the draft finalized by the Public 
Health Engineering Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved 
by the Civil Engineering Division Council, 

0,2 A series of Indian Standards are being formulated to cover different 
types of equipment used for dewatering of treated waste water, such as 
vacuum filtration equipment, pressure filtration equipment and centrifugal 
equipment. 

0,3 Sand and gravel are often employed as dewatering media in sludge 
drying beds, either open to sunlight or covered. This standard provides 
the necessary guidelines for selecting the appropriate type of sand, gravel 
and underdrains for the bed. Other media that may be used are not 
covered under this standard. Typical details of cross-section of sludge 
drying beds are shown in Fig. 1. 

SLUDGE 
CHANNEL 




SLOPE 
Fig. 1 Typical Details of Sludge Drying Bed 

0.4 In the formulation of this standard, due weightage has been given to 
international coordination among the standards and practices prevailing 
in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field 
in India. 



IS : 10037 ( Part I ) - 1981 

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS : 2-1960*, The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard (Parti) lays down the requirement for sand, gravel 
and underdrains used in sludge drying beds. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2*0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 

2.1 Effective Size (ES) — Particle diameter corresponding to 10 percent 
fine on the grain size curve determined according to IS : 2720 ( Part IV )- 
1975t. 

2.2 Uniformity Coefficient — The ratio w~^,-a, where D 60 is the particle 

diameter corresponding to 60 percent fines on the grain size curve and 
D 10 is the particle diameter corresponding to 10 percent fines on the 
grain size curve. 

3. SAND OR STONE DUST 

3.1 Q^iality Requirement 

3.1.1 Sand used for drying beds shall consist of hard, durable grains 
of silica and shall have a specific gravity of not less than 2*5. The 
minimum silica content in sand as determined by the method given in 7 
of IS : 2000-1 962t shall be 90 percent. 

3.1.2 Any sample of sand shall not contain more than 10 percent by 
volume of impurities, such as clay, loam, silt, etc, in one hour of settlement 
after shaking in water in accordance with the procedure described in 
Appendix A of IS : 8419 ( Part I )-1977§. 

3.1.3 The sand shall not contain more than 10 percent of acid soluble 
matter as determined by the solubility test described in Appendix B 
ofiS: 8419 (Part I )-1977§. 



♦Rules for rounding ofFnuinerical values ( revised). 

fMethods of test for soils : Part IV Grain size analysis {first revision )* 

^Methods of chemical analysis of bauxite. 

§Rtquirements for filtration equipment : Part I Filtration media — sand and gravel. 



IS : 10037 ( Part I ) - 1981 

3.2 Grain Shape and Size Variation 

3.2.1 The shape of sand grains is important from the hydraulic and 
suspended solids removal performance point of view. The nearer the 
sand grains approach a sphere (rounded) the better is the performance. 

3.2.2 Size variation shall meet the requirement of effective size and 
uniformity coefficient. The value of ES in the range 0-5 — 0*75 mm and 
the uniformity coefficient not greater than 4*0 are recommeded. 

3.3 Depth of Sand — The minimum depth of sand shall be 150 mm. 

4. GRAVEL 

4.1 Quality Requirements 

4.1.1 Gravel used in drying beds shall consist of hard, perferably 
rounded stones with an average specific gravity of not less than 2*5 and 
shall be free from clay, sand, loam and organic impurities of any kind. 

4.1.2 The gravel shall not contain more than 2 percent by volume of 
thin, flat or elongated pieces ( in which the larger dimension exceeds 
three times the smallest dimension ) determined by hand packing. 

4.1.3 Gravel shall be free from excessive amounts of limestone or 
shells and acid solubility determined in accordance with the procedure 
given in Appendix B of IS : 84rl9 ( Part I )-1977* shall not exceed the 
following limits : 

a) For sizes smaller than 10 mm 5% solubility 

b) For sizes of 10 mm or larger 10% solubility 

4.2 Grain Size and Shape 

4.2.1 Gravel grains shall have a shape as near to sphere as possible. 

4.2.2 The size variation of gravel used in the bed shall not be less than 
25 mm and not more than 50 mm. 

4.3 Depth of Gravel — The minimum depth of gravel which is placed 
above the top of the underdrains shall be 150 mm. At least 80 mm of 
the top layer shall consist of gravel of 3 to 6 mm size. 



♦Requirements for filtration equipment: Part I Filtration media — sand and gravel, 

5 



IS : 10037 ( Part I ) - 1981 

5. UNDERDRAINS 

5.1 Underdrains consist of open jointed laterals and main, non-pressure 
drains laid on the floor of the drying beds. The laterals are placed at a 
spacing of 3 to 6 m. 

5.2 The underdrains shall be made from asbestos cement pipes ( see 
IS : 6908-1975* ), concrete pipes { see IS: 4350-i967t ), vitrified clay pipes 
or tiles. The underdrains can also be made by using burnt clay bricks 
with brick on-edge position. 

5.3 The minimum diameter of pipes shall not be less than 100 mm. 

6. SIDE WALLS 

6.1 Side wails should be of pucca brick or stone masonry extended 
40-45 cm above and at teast 15 cm below the surface. Outer walls 
should be kerbed to prevent washing of sand on beds. 

7. BED DIMENSIONS 

7.1 Bed widths are commonly 6 to 8 m. Bed lengths are commonly 
30 to 45 m, preferably 30 m, for single point wet sludge discharge and 
there is no limit for dimensions for multiple discharge points. A 
minimum of two beds are necessary for sludge removal. 



♦Specification for asbestos cement pipes and fittings for sewerage and drainage. 
fSpecification for concrete porous pipes for under drainage. 



IS : 10037 ( Part I ) - 1981 

( Continued from page 2 ) 

Members Representing 

Shju V. Varadakajan Madras Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage 

Board, Madras 
Shhi S. Daivamani ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. Raman, Director General, ISI ( Ex-qfficio Member) 

Director ( Civ Engg ) 

Secretary 

Shb.1 a. K. Avasthy 
Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI 

Waste Water Treatment Equipment Subcommitte, BDC 40 : 2 

Convener 
Dr B. R, Sundarksan National Environmental Engineering Research 

Institute, Nagpur 

Mtrribers 

Sniii S. K. Gabkabi {AlttYnate to 
Dr B. li. Sundaresan ) 
Shhi R, R. Bagri Institution of Public Health Engineers India, 

Calcutta 
Shki S. K. NisoGi ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. S. Bkatuavan Public Health Engineering Department, 

Government of Kerala, Trivandrum 
Shri S. V.James ( Alternate) 
Shri S. Bhootalinoam Kerala State Board Tor Prevention and Control of 

Water Pollution, Trivandrum 
Shhi J. D. Joysingii ( Alternate ) 
Shki O. P. Bishnot Uttar Pradesh Jal Nigam, Lucknovv 

Shri S. S. Srivastava ( Alternate) 
Chairman Haryana State Board for Prevention and Control 

of Water Pollution, Chandigarh 
Member-Secretary ( Alternate ) 
Chief Engineer (Sewerage) Municipal Coiporation of Greater Bombay 

Depitty Chief Engineer 
(Sewerage) ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. M. Datta Central Public Health and Environmental 

Engineering Organization, New Delhi 
Dr I. RadhAkrisiinan ( Alternate ) 
Shki M. Y. Madan The Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri C. E. S. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Prof B. L. Mahabai, Victoria Jubliee Technical Institute, Bombay 

Shri R. V. S. Murthy ( Alternate ) 
Shri U. C. Mankad M/s Geo-Miller & Co Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 

Shhi D. K. Ghoudhury ( Alternate ) 
Mrmber-Secketauy Central Board for the Prevention and Control of 

Water Pollution, New Delhi 
Dr K. R. Ranoanathan ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 8 ) 



IS : 10037 ( Part I ) • 1981 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri D. V. S. MuKTHY M. P. State Prevention and Control of Water 

Pollution Board, Bhopal 
Shbi S. S. Naik Hydraulic & General Engineers Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi D. R. Kenkre ( Alternate ) 
Shbi R. Natarajan Hindustan Dorr-Oliver Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi B. M. Rahul ( Alternate ) 
Dr N. Rajasekharan Pennwalt India Limited, Bombay 

Dr K. Rudrappa Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 

Shbi R. N. Tiwari {Alternate ) 
Shri V. Satyamttrthi M/s EIMCO-KCP Ltd, Madras 

Shbi T. Subrahmanyam { Alternate ) 
Shbi G. L. Sastri Candy Filtres (India) Ltd, Bombay 

Shri D. B. Pabmar ( Alternate ) 
Prop S. Subha Rao All India Institute of Hygiene &. Public Health, 

Calcutta 

Shhi a. V. Rao ( Alternate ) 



