**************** 



-k is^ 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 

"^^ ^ ^ ^ % ?R^" 

Jawaharlal Nehru 

Step Out From the Old to the New 



^^iiT'jsiS'SfS^Nj^?*:: 




•^■•■^^^■r 




li^ i/ir w w w w w WW ^ ^ ^ tIt w w w 



BLANK PAGE 



^<ii^ 





UI> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 10078 ^ 1982 

( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 

Indian Stamiard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

JOLTING APPARAIUS USED FOR 

TESTING CEMENT 



tIDC 666-97 ! m I 1 2 : 620 1 1 ^ : 620 1 7 




© Cflpir/EAf l^?S2 

INDIAN STAVDA«I>S INSTlTVTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, ^ BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI U0002 

Qf 3 September 1^S2 



18:10078-1982 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

JOLTING APPARATUS USED FOR 

TESTING CEMENT 

Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee, BDC 2 

Chairman Representing 

Dr H. C Visvesvaraya Cement Research Institute of India, New Delhi 

Members 
Additional Director, Standards Research, Designs & Standards Organization 
( B & S ) ( Ministry of Railways ), Lucknow 

Deputy Director, Standards 
( B & S ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. p. Banerjee Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay 

Shri Harish N. Malani ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Banerjee National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri R. N. Bansal Beas Designs Organization, Nangal Township 

Shri T. C. Garg ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. V. Chalapathi Rao Geological Survey of India, Calcutta 

Shri S. Roy ( Alternate ) 
Chief Enoineer ( Designs ) Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Executive Engineer ( Designs ) III 
( Alternate ) 
Chief Engineer ( Projects ) Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab, 

Chandigarh 
Director, IP^I{ Alternate ) 
Director ( CSMRS ) Central Soil and Materials Research Station, 

New Delhi 
Deputy Director ( CSMRS ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. A. E. D'Sa The Concrete Association of India, Bombay 

Shri N. C. Duggal ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. K. Gupta Hyderabad Asbestos Cement Products Ltd, 

Hyderabad 
Shri V. K. Gupta Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters', 

New Delhi 
Shri S. N. Pande ( Alternate ) 
Dr R. R. Hattiangadi The Associated Cement Companies Ltd, Bombay 



Shri P. J. Jagus ( Alternate ) 



( Continued on page 2 ) 



@ Copyright 1982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infrigement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10078 - 1982 

{ Continued from page I ) 

Members 

Dr Iqbal Ali 

Shri S. R, Kulkarni 

Shri S. K. Laha 

Shrj B. T. Unwalla ( Alternate ) 
Dr Mohan Rai 

Dr S. S. Rehsi ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. K. Nambiar 



Shri H. S. Pasricha 

Shrj C. S. Mishra ( Alternate ) 
Shri Y. R. Phull 



Representing 

Engineering Research Laboratories, Hyderabad 

M. N. Dastur & Co Pvt Ltd, Calcutta 

The Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta 

Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), 
Roorkee 

In personal capacity ( 'Ramanalaya' 1 1 First 
Crescent Park Road, Gandhinagar, Adyar, 
Madras ) 
Hindustan Prefab Ltd, New Delhi 



Central Road Research Institute ( CSIR ), 
New Delhi 
Shri M. R. Chatterjee { Alternate I ) 
Shri K. L. Sethi ( Alternate II ) 
Dr M. Ramaiah Structural Engineering Research Centre ( CSIR ), 

Roorkee 



Dr N. S. Bhal ( Alternate ) 
Shri G- Ramdas 



Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, 

New Delhi 
National Buildings Organization, New Delhi 



Gamnjon India Ltd, Bombay 

Indian Roads Congress, New Delhi 

Cement Corporation of India Ltd, New Delhi 



Dr a. V. R. Rao 

Shri J. Sen Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. N. S. Rao 

Shri S. R. Pinheiro ( Alternate ) 
Representative 
Shri Arjun Rijhsinghani 

Shri K. Vithal Rao ( Alternate ) 
Secretary Central Board of Irrigation and Power, New Delhi 

Deputy Secretary ( I ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Sivaguru Roads Wing. Ministry of Shipping and Transport, 

New Delhi 

Shri R. L, Kapoor ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. A. Subramaniam The India Cements Ltd, Madras 

Shr! P. S. Ramachandran { Alternate ) 
Superintending Engineer Public Works Department, Government of 
( Designs ) Tamil Nadu, Madras 

Executive Engineer ( SM & R 
Division ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri L. Swaroop 

Shri A. V. Ramana ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. Raman, 

Director ( Civ Engg ) 



Dalmia Cement ( Bharat ) Ltd, New Delhi 
Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 



Secretary 
Shri M. N. Neelakandhan 
Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI 



( Continued on page ID 



IS : 10078 - 1982 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

JOLTING APPARATUS USED FOR 

TESTING CEMENT 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 28 January 1982, after the draft finalized by the Cement and Concrete 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 

0.2 The Indian Standards Institution has already published a series of 
standards on methods of testing cement and concrete. It has been 
recognized that reproducible and repeatable test results can be obtained 
only with standard testing equipment capable of giving the desired level of 
accuracy. The Sectional Committee, therefore, decided to bring out a 
series of specifications covering the requirements of equipment used for 
testing cement and concrete, to encourage their development and manu- 
facture in the country. 

0.3 Accordingly, this standard has been prepared to cover requirements of 
jolting apparatus required for moulding of the test specimens for the test 
for determination of transverse strength of plastic mortar. Use of this 
apparatus is covered in IS : 4031-1968*. 

0.4 In the formulation of this standard, due weightage has been given to 
international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing 
in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the ^field 
in India. 

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, express- 
ing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS : 2-1960f. The number of significant places retained in the rounded 
off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



•Methods of physical tests for hydraulic cement. 
tRules for rounding off numerical values ( revised }. 



18:10078-1982 
1. SCOPE 



1.1 This standard covers the requirements of jolting apparatus used in 
casting specimens of size 40x40x160 mm for transverse strength test of 
plastic mortar. 



2. MATERIALS 

2.1 The materials of construction of different component parts of the 
jolting apparatus shall be as given in Table 1 . 



TABLE 1 MATERIALS OF CONSTRUCTION OF DIFFEREIVT COMPONENTS 
OF JOLTING APPARATUS 


Sl Part 
No. 


Material 


Special Requirements, 

IF ANY 


(I) (2) 


(3) 


(4) 


i) Table 

ii) Supporting arms 

iii) Spindle 

iv) Projecting lug 


Mild steel 
Aluminium 
Mild steel 
do 


Striking face 

Hardened to not less than 
650 VH or equivalent 


v) Stop 


do 


Wearing face hardened to not 
less than 650 VH or equivalent 


vi) Cam 


do 


Hardened to not less than 650 
VH or equivalent 


vii) Stand 


Cast iron 


Smooth surface, conforming 
to IS: 210-1978* 


viii) Bracket 


do 


Smooth surface, conforming to 
IS : 210-1978» 


ix) Mould 


Mild steel 


Conforming to IS : 226-1975t 


•Specification for grey iron castings ( third revision ). 

tSpecification for structural steel ( standard quality ) ( fifth revision ). 



3. DIMENSIONS 

3.1 The dimensions of the jolting apparatus with mould shall be generally as 
given in Fig. 1 and 2. Where tolerances for dimensions are not specifically 
mentioned dimensions shall be considered nominal. 

Note — Allowable deviations for nominal dimensions shall be as laid down for 
coarse class of deviation in IS : 2102-1969*. 



♦Allowable deviations for dimensions without specified tolerances ( ;?r.rr revision ). 



■BASE PLATE 



TABLE 



CAM 
FOLLOWER 



BOO mm 




z 



SUPPORT ARM 



■1 ^^--^ BRACKET-^ 



O 



I 




STROKE 
COUNTER 



MOTOR WITH 
GEAR BOX 



STAND 

Fig. 1 Typical Jolting Machine 



w 



I 






o> 






^ 



'w 








r 

iOtO-1 



r 



)5±0-5 




^ '^^ 



2^6+2 




All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fig. 2 Typical Mould 40 x 40 x 160 mm Size 



IS : 10078 - 1982 
4. CONSTRUCTION 

4.1 Jolting apparatus shall be constructed as shown in Fig. 1 and shall 
consist of a table which is raised and allowed to fall through a height of 
15±0'1 mm for new apparatus and 15±0-4 mm for the apparatus in use 
by the rotation of a ram. 

4.1.1 Table — The table shall be machined and shall have on the under- 
side a projecting lug with plane face hardened. At the end, a cam follower 
shall be fixed. Guide pieces as shown in Fig. 1 shall be provided so that 
the centre of the central compartment of the mould is directly above the 
points of percussion. It shall be provided with an arrangement to rigidly 
fix the mould. The table shall be rigidly fixed to the supporting arms. 

Note — The combined mass of the table together with mould, hopper and clamps 
shall be20±l kg, 

4.1.2 Supporting Arms — The supporting arms carrying the table shall be 
fixed to a spindle mounted on a bracket. The mass of the supporting arms 
shall be 10±0-3 kg. 

4.1.3 S/o«^ — The stand shall carry a stop having a rounded upper 
surface, and shall be positioned in such a way that the stop is right beneath 
the projecting lug of the table. When the projecting lug rests on the stop, 
its plane iface and that of the table shall be horizontal. The common 
normal through the point of contact of the lug and stop shall be vertical; 
the lug striking face and the stop shall be replaced as soon as this condition 
is no longer met. 

4.1.4 Cam — The cam shall be mounted on the stand as shown in Fig. 1 . 
When the cam is rotated, it shall operate the cam follower raising the 
table and allowing it to drop. The cam shall be driven at a speed of 
60 ±1 rpm. 

4.1.5 Drive — The cam shall be driven by means of an electric motor and 
a reduction gear. Electric motor of 1/3 hp is found suitable. It is 
recommended that a device be provided which stops the drive automatically 
after 60 jolts. 

4.1.6 Bracket — The bracket shall be fixed to a mild steel plate having 
holes for bolting down to a concrete base. The bracket shall be rigidly 
connected to a stand with two arms. 

4.2 Mould ( see Fig. 2 ) ~ The dimensions of the mould with tolerances 
shall be as specified in Table 2. The general requirements of construction 
of the mould shall be as laid down in IS : 10086-1982*. 



♦Specification for moulds for use in tests of cement and concrete. 



IS : 10078 - 1982 

4.2.1 The mould shall embody three compartments and shall rest on a 
machined steel base plate to which it shall be clamped securely. The mould 
shall be surmounted by a hopper made of steel or a non-ferrous metal with 
vertical walls of 20 mm to 40 mm height. Viewed in plan, the interior 
vertical surfaces of the hopper shall be within those of the compartment by 
a distance not exceeding 1 mm. The mass of the mould together with 
hopper and base shall be 13±0 25 kg. 



TABLE 2 DIMENSIONS AND TOLERANCES OF MOULD OF 40 x 40 x 160 mm 

SIZE 

( Clause 4.2 ) 



Sl 

No. 


Description 


Dimensions 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


i) 


Length between inner faces, mm 


160±0-4 


Ji) 


Width between inner faces, mm 


40±01 


iii) 


Height, mm 


40±0-l 


iv) 


Thickness of wall plate ( Min ), mm 


10 


V) 


Angle between the faces and the base 


90±0-5'' 


vi) 


Permissible variation in the planeness of walls, mm 


0-02 


vii) 


Length of base plate, mm 


276±2 


viii) 


Width of base plate, mm 


240±2 



5. JOLTING APPARATUS MOUNTING 

5.1 The apparatus shall be fixed on a concrete base 1 m long, 30 cm wide 
and 80 cm high. The base plates of the stand carrying the cam and bracket 
about which the table rotates shall each be fixed to the concrete base by 
means of four anchor bolts, and when fixing them a thin layer of rich 
mortar should be placed between the base plates and the concrete base in 
order to ensure perfect contact. 

5.2 To reduce the noise, the concrete base shall be placed on four rubber 
pads of 100 X 100 X 10 mm size. 

6. MARKING 

6.1 The following information shall be clearly and indelibly marked on 
each component of the jolting apparatus as far as practicable in a way that 
it does not interfere with the performance of the apparatus: 

8 



IS : 10078 - 1982 

a) Name of the manufacturer or his registered trade-mark or both, and 

b) Date of manufacture. 

6.1.1 The apparatus may also be marked with the ISI Certification Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regula- 
tions made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard 
conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements 
of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control 
which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer. ISI marked 
products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity to that standard as a 
further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the ISI 
Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained 
from the Indian Standards Institution. 



IS : 10078 - 1982 

( Continued from page 2) 

Instruments for Cement and Concrete Testing Subcommittee, BDC 2:10 

Convener Representing 

Dr Iqbal Ah Engineering Research Laboratories, Hyderabad 

Members 
Shri p. D. AoARWAt Public Works Department, Government of Uttar 

Pradesh, Lucknow 
Dr T. N. Chojer ( Alternate ) 
Prot! B. M. Ahuja Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 

Shri T. P. Ekambaram Highways Research Station, Madras 

Shri H. K. Guha All India Instruments Manufacturers and Dealers 

Association, Bombay 
Deputy Secretary ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. J. Jagus The Associated Cement Companies Ltd, Bombay 

Shri D. A. Wadia ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. R. Joshi Research & Development Organization ( Ministry 

of Defence ), Puac 
Shri Y. P. Pathak ( Alternate ) 
Shri E. K. Ramachandran National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri S. K. Ba^erjee ( Alternate ) 
Prof C. K. Ramesh Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay 

Dr R. S. Ayyar ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. V. Ranga Rao Cement Research Institute of India, New Delhi 

Dr K. C. Narang ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. S. Rehsi Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), 

Roorkee 
Shri J. P. Kaushish ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. V. S. R. Sastri Associated Instrument Manufacturers ( India ) 

Private Ltd, New Delhi 
Shri Subhash Sharma ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. L. Sethi Central Road Research Institute ( CSIR ), 

New Delhi 
Shri M. L. Bhatia ( Alternate ) 



10 



