***•••**•••**••• 



tOT3 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
'The Right to Information, The Right to Live'" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 10047 (1981): Methods for testing refractory ramming 
masses [MTD 15: Refractories] 



.^^llli^=ac^^fc^ll f fm^>N:>;»gaTCAaiiTgs 



;5«. \V I iT^ft2i^5c:%^>^ift^ 



yy^^i^^^K^^ 




-k 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge'' 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 



'^liSSlfi, 





5> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Stmhiird 



IS : 10047 - 1S£1 

(Reaffirmed 2002) 



METHODS 01" TESTING 
RErRACTORY RAMMING MASSES 



UDG f«6-762'a32'a : 620' t 




INDIAN STANHAnnS INSTITITION 

MANAK HHAVAIN. t TlAHADUR SHAH EAFAR MARO 
Q^ 3 Septfitiber |9S2 



IS : 10047 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF TESTING 
REFRACTORY RAMMING MASSES 

Refractories Sectional Committee, SMDC 18 

Chairman Representing 

Dr D. N. Nandi Kumardhubi Fireclay & Silica Works Ltd, 

Calcutta 

Members 

Shri p. N. Mohanty ( Alternate to 
Dr D. N. Nandi ) 
Shri D. N. Banerjee Indian Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Burnpur 

Shrt a. K. Mukherjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri Vivek N. Bhaskar Ishwar Industries Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri Vidur Bhaskar ( Alternate ) 
Dr a. K. Bose Associated Cement Companies Ltd, Bombay 

Shri M. R. Vinayaka ( Alternate I ) 
Dr A. K. Chatterjee ( Alternate II ) 
Shri S. K. Chatterjee Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Durgapur Steel 

Plant ), Durgapur 
Shri P. K. Roychowdhury ( Alternate ) 
Shri B, K. P. Chhibbar Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Bokaro Steel 

Plant ), Bokaro 
Shri A. S. Khalkho ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. H. Dalmia Orissa Cement Ltd, Rajgangpur 

Shri K. K. Prasad ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Das Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals 

( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi 
Shri R. N. Saha ( Alternate ) 
Deputy Director ( Met )-I, Ministry of Railways 
RDSO, Lucknow 
Chemist & Metallurgist ( SF ) 
CLW, Chittaranjan ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. M. Gupta Belpahar Refractories Ltd, Belpahar 

Shri T. K. Ghose ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



(g) Copyright 1982 

INDL\N STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infrigement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10047 " 1981 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 
Shri R. K. Gupta 

Shri Ramesh Chand ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. V. Hingorani 

Shri S. K. Jhunjhunwala 

Shri M. M. Sahu ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. R. Khanna 

Shri R. Sachdev ( Alternate ) 
Shri I. C. Modi 

Shri R. K. Sanghi ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Mohanty 
Shri N. C. Mukherjee 

Shri V. S. Bhuta ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. R. K. Murthy 



Shri N. C Saha ( Alternate ) 

Shri R. C. Nandy 

Shri A. K. Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. S. Narayana 

Shri P. S. V. Ananthanarayana 
( Alternate ) 
Dr J. D. Panda 

Dr N. Sahoo ( Alternate ) 
Dr T. V. Prasad 
Shri B. Ramachandran 

Shri T. B. Singh ( Alternate ) 
Dr M. R. K. Rao 

Shri P. C. Sen ( Alternate ) 
Shri A, K. Saha 

Shri D. Kanungo ( Alternate ) 
Shri O. P. Sandhir 



Representing 

All India Glass Manufacturers* 
New Delhi 



Federation, 



Steel Authority of India Ltd. Alloy Steel Plant, 

Durgapur 
Orissa Industries Ltd, Rourkeia 

Directorate General of Technical Development, 
New Delhi 

Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Rourkeia Steel 
Plant ), Rourkeia 

Ministry of Defence ( DGOF ) 

India Firebricks & Insulation Co Ltd, Marar 

Harry Refractory & Ceramic Works Pvt Ltd, 
Calcutta; and Indian Refractory Makers Asso- 
ciation. Calcutta 

Harry Refractory & Ceramic Works Pvt Ltd, 
Calcutta 

M. N. Dastur & Co ( P ) Ltd, Calcutta 

Engineering & Mineral Industrial Research 
Laboratory, Bangalore 



Dalmia Institute of Scientific and Industrial 
Research, Rajgangpur 

Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 
Metallurgical & Engineering Consultants ( India ) 
Ltd, Ranchi 

National Metallurgical Laboratory ( CSIR ), 
Jamshedpur 

National Test House, Calcutta 



Steel Authority of India Ltd, Research & Develop- 
ment Wing, New Delhi 
Shri K. C. Chatter jee ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Sankaran Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Tiruchchirappalh 

Shri C. S. R. Adhithyan ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. C. Sinha Directorate of Production and Inspection ( Navy ), 

Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 
Shri J. M. Wasdev ( Alternate ) 
Dr N, R. Sircar Central Glass & Ceramic Research Institute 

( CSIR ), Calcutta 
Shri K. Ramesam ( Alternate ) 



( Continued on page 12 ) 



IS : 10047 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF TESTING 
REFRACTORY RAMMING MASSES 

0, FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 30 December 1981, after the draft finalized by the Refractories Sectional 
Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council. 

0.2 This standard is intended to be used for assessment of the quality of 
refractory ramming masses as well as for checking their conformity to the 
specifications. 

0.3 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this 
standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it 
shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the methods of sampling and test for refractory 
ramming masses. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions and those 
given in IS : 4041-I967t shall apply. 

2.1 Ramming Mass — Mixtures of graded refractory aggregate with or 
without air/heat-setting additive and with or without moisture. It is usually 
supplied at a consistency which requires mechanical method of application. 
A plasticizing agent may also be incorporated in the ramming masses. 

2.2 Lot — In any consignment, all the containers containing refractory 
ramming mass of the same type ( to be used under the same service condi- 
tions ) and grade, manufactured by the same firm under similar condition 
of production shall be grouped together to constitute a lot. The maximum 
mass of any lot, however, shall be limited to 25 tonnes. 



*Rules for roucding off numerical values ( revised ). 
tGlossary of terms relating to refractory materials. 



IS : 10047 - 1981 

3. SAMPLING AND TEST PIECE PREPARATION 

3.1 For the complete series of tests, a minimum sample of about 50 kg is 
required. Consignments of these materials are usually supplied in 50 kg 
containers and the number of containers, as sample, shall be selected at 
random on the following basis: 

Lot Weight No. of 50 kg Containers to be 

Selected as Sample 
Up to 1 tonne 1 

Over 1 tonne up to and including 2 

4 tonnes 
Over 4 tonnes up to and including 5 

25 tonnes 

3.1.1 Where the material to be supplied includes a liquid component, 
supplied separately, the sample of liquid shall be selected on the following 
basis: 

Lot Size of Ramming Sample Size of Liquid 

Mass Component 

Up to 4 tonnes 2 kg from one container 

Over 4 tonnes up to 10 tonnes Total 5 kg from two containers 

Over 10 up to 25 tonnes Total 10 kg from four containers 

3.2 The selected containers shall be emptied on a suitable surface and the 
material be thoroughly mixed and divided by the process of coning and 
quartering method. The sample shall be reduced to 50 kg in the case of lot 
sizes up to 10 tonnes and 75 kg in the case of lot sizes over 10 tonnes. This 
final sample shall be divided equally into eight test samples by successive 
coning and quartering method. These test samples shall be used for 
various physical tests for moisture determination, sieve analysis, bulk 
density, firing shrinkage, pyrometric cone equivalent, modulus of rupture, 
cold crushing strength, thermal conductivity and also chemical analysis. 
It may be noted that the same test sample may be used for more than one 
test if permitted by respective test methods. 

3.3 Preparation of Test Pieces — The method of preparing test pieces of the 
material has a marked effect on their properties and it is necessary to use a 
standard procedure. 

3.3.1 Apparatus — The apparatus consists of a modified sand rammer ( see 
Fig. 1 ). It comprises a means for supporting the weight, so that the load 
may be removed from the vertical shaft and the provision of graduated steel 
rule is attached to the rammer to indicate the position of the end of the shaft 
and consequently the uniformity in the compaction for a batch of test 
prisms. 




DROP WEIGHT 
Ukg 




B 



FRONT VIEW SIDE VlEW 

Fig. 1 Equipment for Compacting Specimens 



00 



IS ; 10047 - 1981 

3.3.2 Test Pieces — The test pieces used for all the tests, excepting thermal 
conductivity, shall be in the shape of prisms 40 x 40 x 160 mm, when the 
grog size does not exceed 10 mm, and 230 x 1 13 x 65 mm when the grog 
size exceeds 10 mm. The modified sand rammer shall be used for preparing 
the test pieces by controlling the number of strokes of the plunger, to attain 
maximum compaction. In the case of larger specimens, only pneumatic ramm- 
ing shall be used, also to obtain maximum compaction. ( The consistency 
of the material, for the test pieces, shall be as per the instructions given by 
the manufacturer.) The mould used for preparing the specimens shall be in 
accordance with IS : 4031-1968*. 

All the prisms, prepared as test pieces, shall be dried in air for 24 hours 
and for a further period of 24 hours at a temperature of 105-1 10°C. 

4. DETERMINATION OF MOISTURE CONTENT 

4.1 Out of one part of the sample, selected in accordance with 3.2, weigh 
out 500 g for moisture determination, chemical analysis and pyrometric cone 
equivalent ( PCE ) determination. After thorough mixing, 100 g of the 
sample shall be taken for moisture determination. 

4.2 Weigh accurately about 100 g of the sample in a tared weighing dish. 
Dry it in a uniformly heated oven for about 12 hours at 1 05-11 O^C till the 
mass is constant. 

4.2.1 Calculate the percentage moisture by the following formula: 
Moisture, percent = AjB x 100 
where 

A = loss of mass of the sample in g on heating, and 
B = mass in g of the sample taken. 

5. SIEVE ANALYSIS 

5.1 Wet sieve analysis for ramming masses, which has been just mixed, 
shall be carried out in accordance with IS : 1528 ( Part XIV )-I974t. The 
sieve analysis sample shall be drawn as soon as possible, before the ramming 
mass stiffens. 

5.1.1 Wet Analysis — Weigh out 250 g of dried sample from the material 
intended for sieve analysis after thorough mixing and coning and quartering. 
The test sample shall be placed in a container of about one litre capacity. 
Sufficient water shall be added to it to form a slurry. The slurry is to be 



♦Methods of physical tests for hydraulic cement. 

tMethods of sampling and physical tests for refractory materials: Part XIV Determi- 
nation of sieve analysis ( first revision ). 



IS : 10047 - 1981 

transferred without loss to the finest sieve to be used in the analysis and 
shall then be washed by means of a small jet of water from a 6 mm rubber 
hose until the water passing through the sieves contains only traces of sample. 
It may be required to break up lumpy material by gentle rubbing between 
the fingers. The washed residue in the sieve shall be dried to constant mass 
at 1 10 'C. The dried residue shall then be transferred to the top of coarsest 
sieve of the sieves to be used. 

The wet sieve analysis shall be calculated for the test sample on the dry 
mass basis and the results reported to the nearest 01 percent of material 
retained on each sieve. The percentage passing the finest sieve shall be 
reported as the difference between 100 percent and the sum of the percent- 
ages retained on the various sieves. 

6. CHEMICAL ANALYSIS 

6.1 For high silica ramming masses, the chemical analysis shall be carried 
out in accordance with IS : 1527-1972*. For other type of ramming masses, 
the method of analysis shall be as agreed to between the manufacturer and 
the purchaser, 

6.1.1 It is not necessary to analyse separately the wet and dry components 
of the ramming masses. In the case of two-component ramming masses, the 
analysis shall be preferably carried out on rammed and hardened sample, 
which has been hardened by drying at 110°C. 

7. DETERMINATION OF BULK DENSITY 

7.1 Test Specimens — 40 x 160 mm cast specimen, prepared in accordance 
with 3.3.2 or fired specimens shall be used. 

7.2 Test Method — Bulk density shall be determined in accordance with 
IS : 1528 ( Part XII )- 19741% <^^ three test specimens. 

8. DETERMINATION OF LINEAR CHANGE AFTER FIRING 

8.1 Test Specimens — The same three specimens, as that used for deter- 
mining bulk density, shall be used. 

8.2 Test Method — The prisms are set in the furnace and fired in oxidizing 
atmosphere to the test temperature. The furnace shall be heated up to 500 °C 
in one hour, and thereafter at a rate not exceeding 300°C/hour up to the 



* Methods for chemical analysis of high silica refractory materials (first revision ). 
fMethod of sampling and physical tests for refractory materials; Part XH Determina- 
tion of bulk density (first revision ). 



IS : 10047 - 1981 

appropriate test temperature. The maximum temperature shall be maintained 
within ±10°C for three hours and the furnace then allowed to cool natur- 
ally. After coohng to the room temperature, the final linear measurements 
shall be taken. The shrinkage or expansion shall be calculated with respect 
to the original dimensions. 

9. DETERMINATION OF MODULUS OF RUPTURE ( MOR ) 

9.1 Test Specimens — 40x40x160 mm specimens prepared in accordance 
with 3.3.2 shall be used for determining the modulus of rupture after con- 
ducting the test for determination of linear change after firing. 

9.2 Test Method — Any suitable central loading apparatus which is capable 
of the specified rate of loading and of accurate measurement in the required 
range may be used ( see Fig. 2 ). The test specimens measuring 40x40 x 
160 mm shall be placed in the apparatus at room temperature so that the 
single bearing edge is applied to the top face. The span shall be 100 mm 
and the load shall be applied in the middle. Apply the load at a rate of 
50:irl0 N/s until the fracture occurs and note the maximum load. The 
MOR is calculated using the formula: 

R=3 Wljlbd^ 

where 

i?=moduius of rupture in N/mm^ 

PT—load in Newton at which the specimen fails, 

/-=^ distance between the centre lines of the lower bearing edges 
in mm, 

6= width of the specimens in mm, and 

i= depth of the specimen in mm. 

The test shall be carried out on 3 prisms. 

9.2.1 Modulus of rupture test may be carried out by the above method 
on test prisms, which have been cooled after having been pre-fired at any 
test temperature, as agreed to between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 

10, DETERMINATION OF COLD CRUSHING STRENGTH ( CCS ) 

10,1 Test Specimen — The half-prisms, obtained in the 'modulus of rupture' 
tests shall be used for determining the cold crushing strength. The test 
shall be carried out on all the six half prisms obtained after the modulus of 
rupture test. 

8 



IS : 10047 - 1981 



SIDE SUPPORTING 
PLATE t 




FRONT VIEW 



R, R2SCREWED ROLLER 

SUPPORT 
R3 ROLLER FOR LOADING 

SIDE VIEW 



L 


d 


d^ 


s 


t 


a 


^ 


h 


220 


10 


6 


100 


8 


4 


50 


■ 
40 



Ail dimensions in miliimetrcs. 
Fig. 2 Steel Jig for Modulus of Rupture Test 

10.2 Test Method — A mechanical or hydraulic crushing strength testing 
machine ( see Fig. 3 ), shall be used for the determination of crushing 
strength. Each half prism shall be tested for compressive strength on its 
side faces, of which an area 40 x40 mm shall be placed between two hard 
metal plates. This shall be at least 10 mm thick, 40 ±01 mm wide, more 
than 40 mm long and their surfaces shall be plane to within 002 mm. The 
plates shall preferably be of tungsten carbide or a steel with Vickers hard- 
ness index of at least 600. During the test, the plate shall be guided without 
any friction in such a way that the upper is maintained vertically above the 
lower. One of the plates may be slightly inclined to permit perfect contact 
between it and the face of the test specimen. The plate, test specimen and 
suitable guides shall be placed in a compression machine, the upper plate 
of which shall be mounted on a freely moving ball, seating centrally on the 
axis of compression. The side or diameter of this platten shall not be 
larger than 10 cm on account of the sample size of the test specimens. 



IS : 10047 - 1981 




STEEL 
BLOCK 



SOLID STEEL 
BLOCK 




TEST 
SPECIMEN 



All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 3 Loading Arrangement for CCS on Broken Prisms After 

MoR Test 



10 



IS ; 10047 - 1981 

The machine shall have an accuracy of ±1*5 percent for the smallest loads 
used in the test. The load shall be increased at the rate of 100 N/cm^ up 
to about half the expected crushing load and continued till the specimen 
breaks. The load shall be applied uniformly. The CCS shall be calculated 
in the following way: 

CCS- W/A 
where 

W = total maximum load in Newtons; and 
A ^ area of the specimen, in cm^. 

10.2.1 The average value of the 6 half prisms shall be reported. The 
above method shall be applied for all test specimens at different temperatures 
as agreed to by the manufacturer and purchaser. 

11. DETERMINATION OF PYROMETRIC CONE EQUIVALENT ( PCE ) 

11.0 The object of this test is to determine the softening point of the 
ramming masses by comparison of the test cones, prepared from the test 
material with the standard cones. 

11.1 Test Method — The test shall be carried out in accordance with 
IS: 1528 (Part I)- 1 980*. 

12. DETERMINATION OF THERMAL CONDUCTIVITY 

12.1 Principle — The quantity of heat flowing at equilibrium through a 
test panel under specified conditions is measured. The test is carried out 
on a pre-fired sample. The test pieces are fired to specified temperature, at 
which the tests are to be conducted, and the thermal conductivity deter- 
mined at hot-face temperature not exceeding the pre-firing temperature. 
The test may also be carried out after progressively higher pre-firing 
temperatures. 

12.2 Test Specimens — The test sample shall be of the size 230 x 
1 14 X 76 mm. All the samples remaining after other tests shall be mixed 
together and after thorough mixing a representative sample shall be taken 
and the requisite quantity of water or any other liquid binder as needed 
shall be added and rammed in a mould ( of size 230 X 114x76mm) 
with a steel tamping tool. After completion of the moulding, the test 
sample shall be air dried for 24 hours and dried at llO^C for another 
24 hours. It is advisable to pre-fire the sample at SOO^C or at any other 
temperature for 5 hours and cooled before carrying out the thermal 
conductivity test. 

12.3 Test Method — The thermal conductivity test shall be carried out by 
any suitable method as agreed to between the supplier and the purchaser. 



*Methods of sampling and physical tests for refractory materials: Part I Determina- 
tion of pyrometric cone equivalent { PCE ) or softening point ( second revision ). 

11 



IS : 10047 - 1981 

( Continued from page 2 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri K. Swaminathan Tata Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur 

Shri B. N, Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. S. Venkataramiah Steel Authority of India Ltd. Bhilai Steel Plant, 

Bhilai 
Shri V. K, Nityanandan ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. R. Rama Rao, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Struc & Met ) 

Secretary 

Shri B. Mukherji 

Deputy Director ( Met ), IS! 

Panel for Monolithic Refractories and High Alumina Cements, 
SMDC 18/P-7 

Convener 
Shri M. R. Vinayaka Associated Cement Companies Ltd, Bombay 

Members 
Shri S. K. Biswas ( Alternate to 
Shri M. R. Vinayaka ) 
Shri Amrik Singh Refractory Specialities ( India ) Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri R. K. Kar ( Alternate ) 
Shri Vivek N. Bhaskar Ishwar Industries Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri H. V. Bhaskar Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. K. P. Chhibbar Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Bokaro Steel Ltd ), 

Bokaro 
Shri H. G. Upadhyay {Alternate ) 
Shri T. K, Ghose Belpahar Refractories Ltd, Belpahar 

Shri P. Bhattacharya ( Alternate ) 
Shri I. C. Modi Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Rourkela Steel 

Plant ), Rourkela 
Shri R. K. Singh ( Alternate ) 
Dr D, N. Nandy Kumardhubi Fireclay & Silica Works Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri P. N. Mohanty ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. K. Prasad Orissa Cement Ltd, Rajgangpur 

Dr S. L. Kolhatkar ( Alternate ) 
Dr T. V. Prasad Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 

Dr M. R. K. Rao National Metallurgical Laboratory ( CSIR ). 

Jamshedpur 
Shri M. C. Kundra ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. V. Rangarao Cement Research Institute of India, New Delhi 

Shri V. K. Arora ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Sankaran Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Tiruchchirappalli 

Shri C. S. R. Adhithyan ( Alternate ) 
Dr N. R. Sircar Central Glass & Ceramic Research Institute 

( CSIR ), Calcutta 
Shri K. Ramesam ( Alternate ) 



12 



