**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10084-2 (1994) : Design of diversion works - Criteria, 
Part 2: Diversion channel and open cut or conduit in the 
body of dam. [WRD 22: River Training and Diversion Works] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 10084 ( Part 2) : 1994 

( Reaffirmed 1998) 

^frm 2 ^€r % 5f% ^ t'stt'^tt ^jft st^t ^hi ^«n^ 3T«t^t ?ifrRTT 

Indian Standard 
DESIGN OF DIVERSION WORKS — CRITERIA 

PART 2 DIVERSION CHANNEL AND OPEN CUT OR CONDUIT 
IN THE BODY OF DAM 



UDC 627-47 : 62404 



e BIS 1994 

BUREAD OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 
NEW DELHI 110002 

February 1994 Price Gronp 3 



Diversion Works Sectional Committee, RVD 7 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( Part 2 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Diversion Works Sectional Committee had been approved by the River Valley 
Division Council. 

Prior to the commencement of actual construction of any work in the bed of a natural river, it 
becomes obligatory in most cases to exclude temporarily the river flow away from the proposed 
work area during the construction period, so as to permit the work to be done in the dry or 
semi-dry areas. Diversion works provide working area free from water and river flow for cons- 
tructing hydraulic structures. These works, as far as possible, are so designed that when the 
diversion needs are over, these may be utilised partially or fully in the main projects as spillways, 
bottom outlets, irrigation outlets, head race or tail race tunnels. The method and magnitude 
of diversion works will depend primarily upon the cross section of the valley, the type of dam, 
diversion discharge and the bed material in the river. However, in some specific cases, the 
choice of a dam may depend on diversion arrangement, for example an earth dam is not feasi- 
ble where diversion works cannot prevent overtopping of the dam. 

Part 1 of this standard covers the criteria for design of coffer dams of difi'erent types, namely 
masonry/concrete/colloidal concrete, earthen, rockfill, steel and timber coffer dams. The pas- 
sage for diversion of water can be broadly classified into three categories, namely open channel, 
open cut or conduit in the permanent works and tunnels. Part 2 of this standard has been 
prepared to cover the design criteria for diversion channel and open cut or conduit in the body 
of the dam. Part 3 of this standard will cover the design criteria for tunnels. 



IS 10084 ( Part 2 ): 1994 

Indian Standard 
DESIGN OF DIVERSION WORKS — CRITERIA 

PART 2 DIVERSION CHANNEL AND OPEN CUT OR CONDUIT 
IN THE BODY OF DAM 



1 SCOPE 

This standard covers the criteria for design of 
open channel and open cut or conduit in the 
body of the dam as diversion works. 



4.1.1 Diversion 
Dams 



Channels for Masonry/Concrete 



2 REFERENCES 

The following Indian Standards 
adjuncts to this standard: 



are necessary 



IS No, Title 

4410 Glossary of terms relating to 

( Part 12 ) : 1973 river valley projects : Part 12 
Diversion works 



12966 
(Part 2): 1990 

13912 : 1993 



Code of practice for galleries 
and other openings in dams: 
Part 2 Structural design 

Closure of diversion channel 
and open cut or conduit in 
the body of the dam — 
Code of practice 



3 TERMINOLOGY 

For the purpose of this standard, the definitions 
given Jn IS 4410 ( Part 12 ) : 1973 shall apply. 

4 OPEN CHANNEL 

4.1 At sites where diversion of flow through 
tunnels or close conduits is not possible ( due 
to topographical considerations ) or proves to 
be uneconomical, diversion through excavated 
channels called diversion channels is effected. 
Diversion channels are often classified accord- 
ing to the type of diversion namely, single 
stage or multiple stage diversion scheme. In 
the former which is more suitable for narrow 
valleys, the same set of diversion channel and 
coff'er dams is utilised throughout the period of 
construction. In the latter, which is generally 
suitable for wide valleys, the channels and 
coffer dams are shifted from place to place in 
accordance with phasing of the work. A more 
useful classification, however, is based on the 
type of the dam to be constructed namely 
diversion channel for masonry or concrete 
dams and that for the earth or rockfiU dams. 
The following guidelines are followed for their 
design. 



Concrete or masonry dams could be allowed 
to get overtopped during floods when construct- 
ion activity is not in progress. The resulting 
damage is either negligible or could be 
tolerated without much concern. Ther^^fore, 
it is customary to adopt diversion flood which 
is just adequate to be handled during non* 
monsoon season, when construction activity 
of the dam is continued. Generally the largest 
observed non-monsoon flood or non-monsoon 
flood of 100 year return period is adopted as a 
diversion flood. Thisisgenerally a small fraction 
of the design flood of the spillway and, there- 
fore, diversion channel required to handle this 
flood is obviously small. Advantage is also 
taken of passing the floods over partly com- 
pleted dam or spillway blocks, thereby 
keeping the diversion channel of relatively 
smaller size. In such a case a small excavated 
channel either in the available width of the 
river or one of the banks of the river proves 
to be adequate. Construction sluices are 
located in such excavated channels which allow 
passage of non-monsoon flows without hind- 
rance to the construction activity. Such 
sluices are subsequently plugged when the dam 
has been raised to adequate height. If the 
pondage is not allowed even when the dam has 
been raised to sufficient height, the river out- 
lets are often provided in the body af the non- 
overflow or overflow dam to pass the non- 
monsoon flows which later on are kept for 
permanent use after completion of construction. 
If the diversion channel is excavated on one 
of the river banks, it is possible to use the same 
for locating an irrigation outlet, a power house 
or a spillway depending upon the magnitude and 
purpose of the project. Figures 1 and 2 show 
typical layouts of diversion channel for 
masonry/concrete dams in narrow and wide 
rivers. 

4.1.2 Diversion Channel for EarthjRockfill Dams 

4.1.2.1 Earth or rockfiU dams should not 
normally be allowed to be overtopped by floods 
during construction. Therefore, it is impera- 
tive to ensure that the highest water level, 
either during diversion of nbn-fhons"bon flows 



1 



IS 10084 ( Part 2 ): 1994 



D/S COFFER DAM (CONCRETE) 



RIVER ^'^. 
OUTLETS^-^j 



CONSTRUCTION 

SLUICES 



S COFFER DAM {CONCRET-ei 




-CONCRETE PLUG 

Fig. 1 Diversion Channel for Concrbtb/Masonry Dam in a Wide River 




IJ--! 



PLAN 



^^^-P1^^1^2 DIVERSrON 
RlVER_ RFn 




RIVER 

DIVERSION CHANNEL 

U/S COFFER 0AM ( ROCK FfU) 

U/S TOE WAU 

D/S COFFER DAM ( ROCK FILL } 

0/S TOE WAU 

DAM (CONCRETE OR MASONRY) 

DAM BLOCKS WITH TEMP 

OPENING 



ROCK PROFILE 



SECTION 



Fig. 2 Diversion Channel for Concrete/Masonry Dam in a Narrow River 



IS 10084 ( Part 2 ) : 1994 



or passage of monsoon floods is lower than 
top level of the dam during construction. 
Capacity of the diversion flood should be 
worked out on the basis of the standard 
'Design Flood for River Diversion Works — 
Guidelines ( under preparation )'. Because 
of the large volume of flood to be negotiated 
and the fact that earth darns are generally 
located in the main river gorge, diversion 
channels have to be excavated on one of the 
river banks in the case of narrow valleys. The 
layout and principal dimensions, specially the 
cross-section of the diversion channel is 
governed by several considerations such as 
topography, volume of flood to be handled, 
water levels during passage of monsoon and 
non-monsoon floods in consonance with rais- 
ing of the dam and requirement of excavated 
material from diversion channel for use in 
constructing earth dam, etc. The coff'er dams 
in such a case which form integral part of the 
earth or rockfill dam in the finally completed 
stage, are also not allowed to be overtopped 
( though a few examples exist when earth or 
rockfill dams have been allowed to be over- 
topped during diversion with special protection 
on their slopes with concrete blocks or gabions, 
etc ), Because of the considerable expenditure 
and time involved in the construction of diver- 
sion channel for earth dams, these channels 
are designed to be useful for other purpose 
also such as spillway tail channel or power 
house tail channel. Although, initially such 



channels may be without protective lining on 
the sides, they are protected at a subsequent 
stage when utilised for spillway or power 
house tail race channel. Figure 3 shows typical 
example of diversion channels for earth/rock 
fill dam project, in a narrow river channel. 

4.1.2.2 In a wide river channel, provided the 
height of the earth dam is small enough, diver- 
sion could be managed by a temporary channel 
involving a gap through earthfill dam while the 
remainder of the embankment is being 
constructed ( see Fig. 4 ). Before the stream 
is diverted, the foundation required for the 
dam should be completed in the area where 
the temporary opening will be left through 
embankment. This preparation would include 
excavation and refilling of a cut-off trench, if 
one is to be constructed. The stream is then 
channelised through this area after which the 
foundation work in the remainder of the stream 
bed is completed. The portion of the embank- 
ment on either side of the diversion opening 
may then be completed. The side slopes of 
the opening should not be steeper than 4 
vertical to I horizontal to facilitate filling up 
of the gap at the end of the construction period 
and to decrease the danger of cracking of the 
embankment due to differential settlement. 
The flat slope also provides a good bonding 
surface between the previously constructed 
embankment and the material to be placed. 
The bottom level of the temporary channel 



POWIR HOUSE 



SPILLWAY 
TAIL CHANNIL 




Fig. 3 Diversion Channel for Earth/ Rockfill Dam in a Narrow River Channbl 

3 



IS 10084 ( Part 2 ) : 1994 



through embankment should be the same as 
the original stream bed, so that erosion in the 
channel will be minimised. The width of the 
opening will depend on the magnitude of the 
diversion flood and consideration of the equip- 
ment capabilities for filling the gap which 
would be available. The average rate of 
embankment placement should be such that 
the gap could be filled faster than the water 
rise in the reservoir. Care should be exercised 
during filling of the gap so that the quality of 
the work is not sacrificed due to exigencies of 
the situation. This is of great importance 
because frequently the diversion gap is in the 
area where the dam would be of maximum 
height. Special attention should also be given 
to bonding of the newly placed material with 
earthfill previously placed. 

4.2 Design Considerations 

The following points should be considered in 
the design of open channel for diversion: 

a) Although the alignment of the diversion 
channel is governed by topography, 
circular alignment is by far the most 
efficient alignment. The radius of the 
circle should be 3 to 5 times the bed width 
of the channel to obtain equitable flow 
across the channel. However, radius as 
small as twice the bed width may also be 
adopted because of the restraints due to 
other considerations. 

b) Channels are designed on the basis of 
Manning's formula, after adopting 
suitable value of rugosity coefficient 
depending on site conditions. The 
velocity in the unlined section should 
not exceed 5 m/s. In lined channels 
velocity may go up to 15 m/s. 

c) It is also advantageous to provide a fair 
weather flow channel within the diver- 
sion channel so as to restrict the non- 
mansoon flow through the fair weather 
channel thus keeping the rest of the 
diversion channel high and dry to enable 



the work to continue uninterruptedly. 
Provision of a fair weather channel also 
facilitates placing construction sluices 
within the dam body so that diversion 
of the fair weather flow could be con- 
veniently handled even after raising of 
the dam to a considerable height ( see 
Fig. 3 ). Likelihood of silting up of the 
fair weather channel by the monsoon 
floods should, hov/ever, be kept in 
mind. 

d) When the dam is raised and operation 
of construction sluices becomes difficult, 
diversion of non-monsoon flows could 
be eff'ected through river outlets pro- 
vided in the body of the spillway or dam^ 
Often these outlets are used for irrigation 
outlets after completion of the dam. 

e) Although diversion of flow through open 
channel is for temporary use, the require- 
ment of diversion continues for some 
years. In such a condition, it becomes 
necessary to ensure equitable distri- 
bution of discharge across the width of 
the diversion channel. For this purpose 
groynes or spurs could be efi'ectively 
used to ensure satisfactory flow condi- 
tions in the diversion channel {see 
Fig. 3 ). 

f ) Por the diversion channel excavated in 
overburden, it is also necessary to ensure 
that the banks are not eroded due to 
flood flows. While provision of a spur 
could help ensuring concentration of 
discharge in the central portion of the 
channel with minimum velocities along 
the banks, it nevertheless requires 
protection to avoid erosion of the banks. 
If the diversion channel is to be utihsed 
as spillway channel or power house tail 
race channel, the protection measures 
are designed such that those could be 
useful during permanent stage also. In 
other cases, pitching with .stones, rip 
rap or gabions is normally adopted. 




DIVERSION CHANNEL 



Fig. 4 Divbrsioh Through a Gap in the Earth Dam in a Wide River Channel 



IS 10084 ( Part 2 ) : 1994 



4.3 Model Studies 

4,3.1 Hydraulic model studies for evolving 
suitable arrangement of the diversion through 
open channel are almost indispensable. The 
model studies help deciding the most efficient 
alignment of the diversion channel, heights of 
the upstream and downstream coffer dams, 
protection measures for the coffer dams if they 
are to be overtopped, flow conditions in the 
diversion channel and protection measures for 
the diversion channel depending on its jitility 
during diversion as well as during permanent 
stage. The discharging capacity of partly 
constructed spillway blocks could only be 
assessed through model studies as no accurate 
theoretical approach is still available for such a 
complex three dimensional flow situation. 

5 OPEN CUT OR CONDUIT 

5.1 The river floods may be so large that pro- 
vision of diversion passages even for average 
floods may be highly expensive. The only 
alternative is to have them passed over or 
through the dam, although this does apply 
mostly to concrete dams. Smaller floods oc- 
curring during non-monsoon period are handled 
by temporary low level outlets works, permanent 
outlets works or other diversion arrangements 
while the monsoon floods are passed by over 
topping certain dam blocks purposely left at low 
level than others. 

5.2 The capacity of diversion arrangement 
should be worked out on the basis of the stan- 
dard 'Design Flood for River Diversion Works- 
Guidelines ( under preparation )'. The conduit 
for diversion arrangement has to be designed 
normally as an outlet sluice in the body of the 
dam, that is, the reinforcement details should 



be worked out according to standarii design 
criteria. The diversion conduit would nor- 
mally be a rectangular conduit with height/ 
width ratio of l'5/l-O to 2-0/1-0. It would be 
desirable to flare the downstream end of the 
conduit to reduce the discharge intensity. 
Structural design of conduit should be done 
according to IS 12966 ( Part 2 ) : 1990. 

If the conduit/sluice is used as a permanent 
structure, permanent gates and hoisting arrange- 
ment should be provided. In ease the conduit/ 
sluice is to be closed after diversion, there is 
no necessity of providing a gate in the body of 
the sluice but a bulk-head gate on the upstream 
with proper guidance for closing purposes may 
be provided. The permissible velocity in the 
conduit may be limited to 20 m/s. It is neces- 
sary to see that diversion channels and diversion 
tunnels are steel lined from intake to end of 
transition to avoid damage to the invert and 
sides due to rolling boulders, if carried in 
rivers. 

The pressure fluctuations under transient flow 
conditions should be examined closely. It 
should also be ensured that change from free 
surface to pressure flow take place smoothly. 

The conduit should preferably be in the non- 
overflow block of the dam close to the spillway 
portion. Proper care should be taken for the 
dissipation of the energy at the outlet of the 
diversion conduit. 

6 CLOSURE 

When diversion channel and open or conduit 
in the body of the dam are no longer required 
for construction purpose, they should be closed 
as recommended in IS 13912 : 1993. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of stadardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced 
in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, 
in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type 
or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director 
(Publications), BK. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Amendments arc issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards 
are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review 
indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken 
up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of *BIS Handbook' and 'Staiidards 
Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No, RVD 7 ( 88 ). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 



Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 

NEW DELHI 110002 
Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola r37 84^9, 37 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 137 86 26, 37 86 62 



Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 



f 331 01 31 
|331 13 75 

ni 

\37 

r53 38 43, 53 16 40 
^53 23 84 



[235 02 16, 235 04 42 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 < 235 15 19 235 23 15 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) r632 92 95, 632 78 58 

BOMBAY 400093 "[632 78 9 1, 632 78 92 

Branch : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 

FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Printwell Printers, Aligarh, India 



