**************** 


-k  t^^ 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  10059  (1981):  Edible  Fish  Powder  [FAD  12:  Fish  and 
Fisheries  Products] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y>K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


15  :  t0059-1S81 

(  Reaffirmed  2000 ) 

Indian  Standard 

SPECIFICATION  FOR 
EDIBLE  FISH  POWDER 


UDC    664-5^:i2'7  :  66495 


©  Cppyrigfil  1982 

INDIAN     STANDARDS     INSTITUTION 
MANAK     BHAVANk    9     BAHADUR     SHAH     ZAFAR    MARG 


NEW  DELHI  UCDDS 

March  1562 


IS  :  10059  -  1981 

Indian  Standard 

SPECIFICATION  FOR 
EDIBLE  FISH  POWDER 

Nutrition  Sectional  Committee,  AFDC  37 

Chairman  Representing 

Db  K.  T.  Achaya  United   Nations   University   Programme,   Central 

Food      Technological      Research       Institute 
(CSIR),  Mysore 

Members 
Db  a.  S.  Aiyab  Protein      Foods      and      Nutrition      Development 

Association  of  India,  Bombay 
Db  B.  p.  Baliga  Tata  Oil  Mills  Co  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shbi  M.  C.  Badami  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  M.  G.  Deo  Indian  National  Science  Academy,  New  Delhi 

Db  Baldev  Singe  (  Alternate  ) 
Db  A.  D.  Deodhab  National     Dairy    Research     Institute    ( IGAR ). 

Karnal 

Db  B-  N.  Mathxjb  (  Alternate  ) 
Db  (  Smt  )  Rajammal  P.  Devabas    Home  Science  Association  of  India,  Coimbatore 

Db  Syed  Riaz  Ahmed  (  Alternate  ) 
ShbiJasbib,  Singh  Food  Corporation  of  India,  New  Delhi 

Shbi  T.  Ramasivan  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  K.  S.  Kannan  The  Britannia  Industries  Ltd,  Bombay 

Db  R.  Jayabam  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  H.  H.  Lillakby  Solvent  Extractors'  Association  of  India,  Bombay 

Shbi  R.  K.  Sbth  (  Alternate  ) 
Db  V.  B.  MiTBANDBB  Modern  Bakeries  (  India )  Ltd,  New  Delhi 

Db  M.  M.  Kbishna  ( Alternate  ) 
Db  M.  S.  Naik  Indian  Agricultural  Research  Institute  ( ICAR  ), 

New  Delhi 

Db  B.  M,  Lal  (  Alternate  ) 
Db  B.  S.  Nabasinga  Rao  National  Institute  of  Nutrition,  New  Delhi 

Db  S.  S.  Phatak  Food  &  Nutrition  Board,  Ministry  of  Agriculture 

&  Irrigation,  New  Delhi 

Shbi  G.  D.  Shabma  ( Alternate  ) 
Db  N.  S.  RaJagopal  Directorate  of  Vegetable  Oils  &  Fats,  Department 

of  Civil  Supplies  and  Co-operation,  New  Delhi 

Db  M.  K.  KuNDtr  (  Alternate ) 

(  Continued  on  page  2 ) 


©  Copyright  1982 

INDIAN  STANDARDS  INSTITUTION 

This  publication  is  protected  under  the  Indian  Copyright  Act  ( XIV    of  1957 )   and 

reproduction  in  whole  or  in  part  by  any  means  except  with  written  permission  of  the 

publisher  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an  infringement  of  copyright  under  the  said  Act. 


IS  :  10059  "  1981 

(  Continued  from  page  1 ) 

Members  Representing 

Shri  S.  Ramaswamy  Directorate   General   of  Technical  Development, 

New  Delhi 
Assistant  Development  Officer  (  Alternate ) 
Shri  M.  G.  Sathe  Sathe  Biscuits  and  Chocolate  Company  Ltd,  Pune 

Snra  S.  V.  Phadke  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  p.  C.  Sen  Directorate  General  of  Health  Services,  New  Delhi 

Shri  D.  S.  Chadha  (Alternate) 
Shri  V.  H.  Shah  Kaira  District  Cooperative  Milk  Producers*  Union 

Ltd,  Anand 
Shri  Kailash  Vyas  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  K.  Srinivasan  Hindustan  Lever  Ltd,  Bombay 

Maj  Gen  A.  R.  Sxjbramanian  Directorate    General    of  Armed   Forces   Medical 

Service,  New  Delhi 
Col  P.  S.  Gill  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  G,  a.  Sulebele  Bangalore  Dairy  Miltone  Project,  Bangalore 

Shbi  B.  K.  Ramaiah  ( Alternate) 
Dr  M.  S.  Sv/aminathan  Indian  Council   of  Agricultural  Research,   New 

Delhi 
Dr  V.  Naoarajan  (  Alternate  ) 
Kumari  M.  S.  Us  ha  G.  B.  Pant  University  of  Agriculture  and  Techno- 

logy, Pantnagar 
Dr  S.  Venkat  Rao  Central    Food    Technological   Research    Institute 

(CSIR),  Mysore 
Dr  p.  B.  Rama  Rao  (  Alternate ) 
Dr  p.  IC.  Vijayaraghavan  Defence  Food  Research  Laboratory,  Mysore 

Dr  M.  V.  Rama  Rao  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  Vineet  Virmani  Roller  Flour   Millers'    Federation  of  India,  New 

Delhi 
Shri  Santantt  Ghaudhtjri  {Alternate  ) 
Shri  T.  Purnanandam,  Direetor^General,  ISI  (  Ex-officio  Member) 

Director  (  Agri  &  Food  ) 

Secretary 

Shrimati  Shashi  Sareen 
Assistant  Director  (  Agri  &  Food  ),  ISI 


Protein  Rich  Foods  Subcommittee,  AFDG  37  :  2 

Convener 
Dr  M.  S.  Narasinoa  Rao  Central  Food    Technological  Research  Institute 

(CSIR),  Mysore 

Members 
Shri  M.  Kantharaj  Urs  (  Alternate  to 
Dr  M.  S.  Narasinga  Rao  ) 
Dr  a.  S.  Aiyak  Protein      Foods     and      Nutrition     Development 

Association  of  India,  Bombay 


(  Cmtinued  on  page  9  ) 


IS  :  10059  -  1981 

Indian  Standard 

SPECIFICATION  FOR 
EDIBLE  FISH  POWDER 

0.    FOREWORD 

0.1  This  Indian  Standard  was  adopted  by  the  Indian  Standards  Institution 
on  31  December  1981,  after  the  draft  finalized  by  the  Nutrition  Sectional 
Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Agricultural  and  Food  Products 
Division  Council. 

0.2  Fish  is  a  potential  source  of  food.  The  exploration  along  the  vast 
coastline  will  further  augment  its  supplies  to  meet  internal  demand  for 
edible  fish,  leaving  some  surplus  also.  The  use  of  surplus  fish  can  well  be 
used  for  production  offish  powders  of  edible  quality, 

0.3  Edible  fish  powder  is  prepared  for  human  consumption  by  a  hygienic 
process  that  does  not  involve  solvent  extraction.  Edible  fish  powder 
contains  all  the  nutritional  ingredients  like  protein,  vitamins  and  minerals, 
and  has  the  organoleptic  qualities,  like  taste  and  flavour,  of  dry  fish.  It  is 
completely  free  from  toxic  organic  solvents  and  added  chemicals. 

0.4  Being  an  animal  protein,  the  quality  of  fish  protein  is  high  and  the 
lysine  level  is  particularly  good.  Its  use  even  in  small  quantities  would 
serve  to  boost  the  protein  quality  of  cereal-based  diets  wherever  feasible. 
Use  could  also  be  thought  of  in  the  formulation  of  convalescent  and 
formulated  foods,  either  by  food^manufacturers  or  in  the  home, 

0,5  A  recommended  method  for  the  preparation  of  edible  fish  powder  is 
given  in  Appendix  A. 

0.6  In  the  preparation  of  this  standard,  due  consideration  has  been  given 
to  the  relevant  Rules  prescribed  by  the  Government  of  India  under  the 
Prevention  of  Food  Adulteration  Act,  1954  and  the  Standards  of  Weights 
and  Measures  (Packaged  Commodities)  Rules,  1977.  The  standard  is, 
however,  subject  to  the  restrictions  imposed  under  these  wherever 
applicable. 

0.7  For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of 
this  standard  is  complied  with,  the  final  value,  obsei^-ed  or  calculated, 
expressing  the  result  of  a  test  or  analysis,  shall  be  rounded  off  in 
accordance    with    IS :  2-1960*.      The    number     of     significant     places 


•Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  ( revised). 

3 


IS  :  10059  -  1981 

retained   in   the   rounded   off  value  should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the 
Specified  value  in  this  standard. 


1.  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  prescribes  requirements  and  methods  of  sampling  and 
test  for  edible  fish  powder. 

2.  RAW  MATERIAL 

2.1  Fresh  fish  of  edible  quality  which  is  normally  consumed  v^hoie 
should  be  used  for  preparation.  Edible  fish  powder  may  be  prepared 
from  non-oily  white  fish  like  sprats  [Anchovilla  spp),  perch,  ribbon  fish, 
dhara/dome,  etc,  either  from  a  single  species  or  their  mixture. 

2.2  The  fish  need  not  be  dressed  but  should  be  washed  and  cooked  well 
for  the  preparation  of  the  powder. 

2.3  Poisonous  fish  like  marine  snakes,  elasmobranch  fish  with  a  high 
quantity  of  urea,  oily  fish  and  fish  with  black  viscera  are  not  considered 
suitable  for  the  preparation  of  edible  fish  powder. 

3.  REQUIREMENT 

3.1  Description  —  Edible  fish  powder  shall  be  a  fine  powder  free  from 
needle-like  bones.  It  shall  blend  easily  with  cereal  flours.  It  shall  have 
a  faint  yellow  colour  and  the  characteristic  flavour  and  taste  of  dry  fish. 
It  shall  be  free  from  rancidity  and  off*-flavours. 

3.1.1  No  organic  solvent  or  chemicals  shall  be  used  in  its  preparation. 

3.2  Particle  Size  —  Unless  otherwise  specified,  the  edible  fish  powder 
shall  be  of  such  fineness  that  it  passes  completely  through  a  100-mesh 
sieve  [see  IS  :  460  (Part  II)- 1978*]. 

3.3  The  edible  fish  powder  shall  comply  with  the  requirements  given  in 
Table  1. 

3.4  Protein  Efficiency  Ratio  (PER)  —  The  PER  when  determined  by 
the  method  given  in  IS  :  7481-1974t  shall  not  be  less  than  2-5. 

3.5  Bacteriological  Requirenient  —  The  material  shall  also  comply 
with  the  bacteriological  requirements  given  in  Table  2. 


♦Specification  for  test  sieves:  Part  II   Perforated  plate  test  sieves  (  second  revision  ] 
•^Method  for  determination  of  protein  efficiency  ratio  (PER). 


IS  :  10059  -  1981 


TABLE  1    REQUIREMENTS  FOR  EDIBLE  riSH  POWDER 

(  Clause  3.3  ) 

Sl  No.  Characteristic 


(1)  (2) 

i)        Moisture  percent  by  mass,  Max 
ii)       Crude  protein  content  (N  x6*25), 

on  dry  basis,  percent  by  mass, 

Min 

iii)       Total  available  lysine,  g/100  g  of 
protein,  Min 

iv)       Fat  content,  on  dry  basis,  percent 
by  mass.  Max 

v)       Ash,   on  dry   basis,  percent   by 
mass,  Max 

vi)       Acid  insoluble  as,  on  dry  basis, 
percent  by  mass,  Max 

vii)       Fluoride  (as  F),  tag /kg,  Max 

viii)        Mercury>  mg/kg,  Max 

ix)       Lead,  mg/kg.  Max 

*  Specification  for  fish  protein  concentrate. 


Requibement 


(3) 


Method  of  Test, 
Ref  to  Appen"dix 
OF  IS  :  9808-1982* 

(4) 


10 

A 

65 

B 

6 

G 

6 

D 

18 

E 

0*5 

F 

250 

G 

D'5 

H 

2-5 

J 

TABLE   2     BACTERIOLOGICAL  REQUIREMENTS  OF 
EDIBLE  FISH  POWDER 


(  Clause  3.5 ) 

St 

No. 

Ghabaotbristio 

Requi-remenx 

Method  of  Test, 
Rkf  to 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

i) 

Total  bacterial  count,  Aiax 

15  000  per  g 

18:5402=1969* 

H) 

E.    coll     and     pathogenic 
organisms  including 
salmonella 

Nil 

IS  :  5887-1976 
(Parts  I  and  III)t 

♦Method  for  plate  count  of  bacteria  in  foodstuffs, 

tMethods  for  detection  of  bacteria  responsible  for  food  poisoning: 

Part  I  Isolationand   identification   of    enteropathogenic  Escherichia   coli  and  the 
enumeration  of  Escherichia  coli 

Part  m  Isolation  and  identification  oi  salmonella  and  shigella. 


IS  :  10059  -  1981 

4.  PACKING  AND  MARKING 

4.1  Packing  —  The  edible  fish  powder  shall  be  packed  in  clean,  sound 
containers  made  of  tinplate,  PGRG  sheets,  cardboard  paper  or  other 
material  agreed  to  between  the  purchaser  and  vendor  in  such  a  way  as  to 
protect  it  from  spillage,  contamination,  migration  of  moisture  or  air  from 
the  atmosphere,  and  seepage  of  fat  into  the  material  through  the  packing 
material.  When  packed  in  flexible  material  the  packaging  material  should 
be  capable  of  withstanding  handling  during  transportation.  The  edible 
fish  powder  shall  not  come  in  direct  contact  with  packaging  material  other 
than  grease-proof  or  sulphate  paper,  cellulose  paper  or  any  other  non- 
toxic packing  material  which  may  be  covered  with  moisture-proof 
laminate  or  coated  paper.  When  packed  in  metallic  containers,  the 
container  shall  be  airtight  and  completely  filled  to  have  minimum  air  or 
the  space  shall  be  filled  with  inert  gas,  or  the  contents  held  in  vacuum. 

4.2  Marking  —  The  following  details  shall  be  clearly  marked  on  the 
container: 

a)  Name,  type  and  grade  of  the  material; 

b)  Name  and  address  of  manufacturer; 

c)  Batch/Code  number; 

d)  Minimum  net  mass  and  gross  mass; 

e)  Date  of  manufacture;  and 

f )  Any   other  requirements  under   the   Standards  of  Weights  and 
Measures  (Packaged  Commodities)  Rules,  1  977. 

4.2.1  Each  container  may  also  be  marked  with  the  ISI   Certification 
Mark. 

Note  —  The  use  of  the  ISI  Certification  Mark  is  governed  by  the  provisions  of 
the  Indian  Standards  Institution  ( Certification  Marks  )  Act,  and  the  Rules  and 
Regulations  made  thereunder.  The  ISI  Mark  on  products  covered  by  an  Indian 
Standard  conveys  the  assurance  that  they  have  been  produced  to  comply  with  the 
requirements  of  that  standard  under  a  well-defined  system  of  inspection,  testing  and 
quality  control  which  is  devised  and  supervised  by  ISI  and  operated  by  the  producer. 
ISI  marked  products  are  also  continuously  checked  by  ISI  for  conformity  to  that 
standard  as  a  further  safeguard.  Details  of  conditions  under  which  a  licence  for  the 
use  of  the  ISI  Certification  Mark  may  be  granted  to  manufacturers  or  processors, 
may  be  obtained  from  the  Indian  Standards  Institution. 

5.  SAMPLING 

5.1  Representative  samples  of  material  for  test  and  criteria  for  conformity 
shall  be  drawn  according  to  the  method  prescribed  in  IS  :  5315-1978*. 


•Methods  of  sampling  for  milled  cereals  and  pulses  products  {first  revision), 

6 


IS  :  10059  -  1981 

6.  TESTS 

6.1  Tests  shall  be  carried  out  as  prescribed  in  3.4  and  col  4  of  Tables  1 
and  2  using  pure  chemicals  and  distilled  water  {see  IS ;  1070-1977*). 

Note  —  *Pure  chemicals*  shall  mean  chemicals  that  do  not  contain  impurities 
which  affect  the  test  results. 

APPENDIX    A 

(  Clause  0.5 ) 

METHOD  FOR  THE  PREPARATION  OF  EDIBLE  FISH  POWDER 

A-1.  RAW  MATERIAL 

A.1.1  Edible  fish  powder  can  be  prepared  from  lean  white  fish  of  pelagic 
type  such  as  sprats  [Anchovilla  spp).  It  is  very  important  to  remove  from 
the  lot  oily  fish,  such  as  sardine,  fish  with  high  urea  content,  and  fish  or  sea 
animals,  such  as  marine  snakes  which  may  impart  toxicity,  poison,  smell 
or  colour  to  the  product.  Only  very  fresh  fish  shall  be  used  for  the 
preparation. 

A-2.  PREPARATION  OF  PRESSED  CAKE 

A-2*l  Raw  miscellaneous  fish  received  from  the  boat  shall  undergo 
preliminary  sorting,  and  fatty  fish  like  sardine,  shark,  cat  fish  and  non- 
edible  varieties  are  removed  by  hand  picking.  The  material  shall  then  be 
washed  well,  in  a  concrete  washing  tank  lined  inside  with  glazed  tiles  and 
fitted  with  false  bottom  and  an  outlet  pipe,  using  potable  water  several 
times  to  remove  sand,  dirt,  slime  and  other  extraneous  matter. 

A-2.2  The  washed  mass  is  transferred  as  such  without  dressing  to  a  steam- 
jacketted  stainless  steel  hemispherical  kettle  having  a  tilting  arrangement, 
using  sufficient  quantity  (1:1)  of  potable  water  to  completely  immerse 
the  fish.  The  fish  is  then  cooked  at  lOO^G  and  boiled  for  30  minutes 
under  frequent  agitation  using  a  hand  ladle  till  the  whole  mass  is 
completely  disintegrated.  After  cooking,  the  slurry  is  cooled  and  allowed 
to  stand  for  some  time  to  settle,  so  that  the  oil  floats  up.  The  oil-water 
mixture  is  decanted  off  by  tilting  the  vessel.  The  operation  is  repeated 
once  more.  The  solid  mass  is  then  taken  in  a  nylon  bag  and  pressed  in 
a  screw  hydraulic  press  at  a  pressure  of  5  kg/cm-  to  remove  the  maximum 
amount  oi  water.  The  pressed  cake  so  obtained  is  manually  broken  into 
small  lumps. 


♦Specification  for  water  for  general  laboratory  use  (  second  revision), 

7 


IS  :  10059  -  1981 

A-3,  PRODUCTION  OF  DRY  POWDER 

A-3.1  The  pressed  mass  is  then  dried  on  aluminium  trays  in  a  hot  air 
tunnel  drier  at  a  temperature  of  67-70**C  to  a  final  moisture  level  of 
5  percent  and  below.  The  dried  cake  while  hot  is  pulverised  in  a  beater 
type  pulveriser  to  a  fine  powder.  The  powder  is  sieved  in  a  mechanical 
gravity-type  sieving  machine  to  150- micron  size  and  the  oversized  produce 
is  pulverised  once  again,  sieved  and  the  final  oversize  which  contains 
mainly  bones,  scales,  etc,  is  discarded.  The  sieving  machine  shall  have 
all  its  contact  parts  made  of  stainless  steel  and  shall  be  fitted  with  two 
sieves  (80  and  1 50  micron)  in  two  decks,  w  ith  an  arrangement  for 
continuous  charging  and  for  receiving  products  and  oversize  products 
continuously  without  stopping  the  machine.  The  product  is  tested 
chemically  and  bacteriologically.  The  edible  fish  powder  is  then  packed 
(see  4.1). 


IS:  10059 -1981 

(  Continued  from  page  2  ) 

Members  Representing 

Dr  K,  T.  ACHA.YA  United   Nations   University    Programme,  Central 

Food      Technological      Research      Institute 
(CSIR),  Mysore 
Shri  S.  N.  Agarwai*  Prag  I»e  and  Oils  Mills,  Aligarh 

Shri  M.  G.  Badami  Tata  Oil  Mills  Go  Ltd,  Bombay 

Dr.  G.  S.  Sabnis  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  D.  S.  Ghadha  Gentral  Committee  for  Food  Standards,  New  Delhi 

Shbimati  Debi  Mukherjee  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  J.  M.  Datta  The  Britannia  Industries  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  Jasbir  Singh  Food  Corporation  of  India,  New  Delhi 

Shri  T.  Ramasivan  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  G.  Lakshminarayaka  Regional       Research       Laboratory      (GSIR), 

Hyderabad 
Shri  V.  Krishnamoorthi  {Alternate) 
Shri  A.  K.  Malik  Technical        Standardization        Committees 

(  Foodstuffs  ),  New  Delhi 
Shri  M.  Bandyopabhyay  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  B.  S.  Narasinoa  Rao  National  Institute  of  Nutrition,  Hyderabad 

Dr  N.  S.  Rajaqopal  Directorate  of  Vegetable  Oils  &  Fats,  Department 

of  Civil  Supplies  &  Cooperation,  New  Delhi 
Dr  M.  K.  KtTKDtT  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  S.  Ramaswamy  Directorate  General   of  Technical  Development, 

New  Delhi 
Dr  U.  Y.  Rege  Raptakos  Brett  and  Company  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  V.  H.  Shah  Kaira    District    Co-operative     Milk     Producers' 

Union  Ltd,  Anand 
Shri  Dikesh  Shahra  General  Foods  Private  Ltd,  Indore 

Shri  Santosh  Shahra  (Alternate  ) 
Dr  G.  D.  Sharma  Food    &  Nutrition  Board,   Department   of  Food, 

New  Delhi 
Shri  K,  K.  Krishnamtjrthy  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  G.  A.  SuLEBELE  Bangalore  Dairy  Miltone  Project,  Bangalore 

Shri  B.  K.  Ramaiah  (  Alternate  ) 


INDIAN    STANDARDS 

ON 

NUTRITIOUS  FOODS 

IS: 

3137-1974  High-protein  mixes  for  use  as  food  supplement  {first  revisi&n  ) 

4684-1975  Edible  groundnut  flour  (  expelier  pressed  )    (first  revision  ) 

4874-1968  Edible  cottonseed  flour  (  expelier  pressed  ) 

4875-1975  Edible  groundnut  flour  (  solvent  extracted  )  [first  revision  ) 

4876-1968  Edible  cottonseed  flour  (solvent  extracted  ) 

6108-1971  Edible  sesame  flour  (  solvent  extracted  ) 

6109-1971  Edible  sesame  flour  (  expelier  pressed) 

7021-1973  Protein-rich  food  supplements  for  infants  and  pre-school  children 

7481-1974  Method  for  determination  of  protein  efl5ciency  ratio  (PER) 

7482-1974  Protein-based  beverages 

7487-1974  Protein-rich  biscuits 

7835-1975  Edible  medium-fat  soya  flour 

7836-1975  Edible  low-fat  soya  flour 

7837-1975  Edible  full-fat  soya  flour 

8211-1976  Edible  soya  protein  isolate 

8212-1976  Edible  groundnut  protein  isolate 

8220-1976  Protein  rich  concentrated  nutrient  supplementary  foods 

8222-1976  Edible  leaf  protein  concentrate 

8664-1977  Edible  coconut  flour  (  expelier  pressed  ) 

8665-1977  Protein  fortified  bread 

8676-1977  Edible  coconut  flour  (  solvent  extracted  ) 

8677-1977  Edible  sunflower  seed  flour  (solvent  extracted  ) 

8678-1977  Vegetable  protein-based  yoghurt  (  vegetable  curds  ) 

9037-1979  Peanut  butter 

9038-1979  Reconstitutable  protein  beverage  powder 

9039-1979  Edible  sunflower  seed  grits 

9071  (  Part  I  )-1979     Code   of  practice  for  control  of  aflatoxin  in  groundnuts:     Part  I 

Harvesting,  transport  and  storage  of  groundnut  kernels. 
9071  (  Part  II  )-I979     Code  of  practice  for  control  of  aflatoxin  in  groundnuts:     Part  II 

Plant  storage  and  processing  flour  and  oil 

9095-1979  Protein  chewy  candy 

9216-1979  Glossary  of  common  terms  relating  to  nutrition  and  nutritous  foods 

9487-1980  'Ready-to-eat'  protein-rich-extruded  foods 

9488-1979  Edible  coconut  protein  concentrates 


