**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10090 (1982): Specification for numericals [CED 15: 
Builder Hardware] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangarara Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



15 £ 10090 - 1981 

( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 



Indian Standard 
SPECIFICATION FOR NUMERICALS 



imc 691 8e'0fl6'025 i 621 - 777 




^ Ca0Tisfii 19B2 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK. BllAVAN, U MHAlJUK JSHAH ZAJ Aft MAEtG 
NEW DELHI ILCMM*:; 

Q^ 2 December 19S2 



IS i 10090 - 1962 

Indian Standard 
SPECIFICATION FOR NUMERICALS 

Builder's Hardware Sectional Committee, BDC 15 

Chairman Representing 

Shm Yusuf Mowjee M. G. Mowjee & Company Private Ltd, Calcutta; 

and Builder's Hardware Industries Association 
of India, Calcutta 

Members 

Shri Sahib Singh ( Alternate to 
Shri Yusuf Mowjee ) 
Shri D. R. Bahl Engineer-in-Chief 's Branch, Army Headquarters 

Shri S. G. Mahajan ( Alternate ) 
Shri D, S. Ghauhan Regional Testing Centre ( Northern ) ( Ministry of 

Industry ) 

Shri A. K. Duggal ( Alternate ) 
Controller of Stores, Ministry of Railways 

Eastern Railway 
Shri S. K. Dutta Housii^ and Urban Development Corporation Ltd, 

New Delhi 
Shri K. H. Gandhi Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri Vijay Kumar ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. Ghosh National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri A. K. Sarkar ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. K. Jain P. P. Products, Aligarh 

Shri Rakesh Kamboj Jayna Trading Corporation, Delhi 

Shri Nawal Kamboj ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. G. Kapoor Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, New 

Delhi 

Shri I. C. Khanna ( Alternate ) 
Shri Ram F. KewAlramani Indian Institute of Architects, Bombay 

Col p. G. Khanna Argent Industries, New Delhi 

Maj-Gen K. D. Ghadha ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. G. Menon Indian Aluminium Go Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri D. S. Narayan ( Alternate ) 
Shri Ajoyendu Paul Gobindo Sheet Metal Works & Foundry, Calcutta 

Shri Amitabh Paul ( Alternate ) 
Dr A. V. R. Rao National Buildings Organization, New Delhi 

Shri O. P. Ratra ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. C. Solanki Sen-Harvic, Bombay 

Shri N. K. Raghoowanshi ( Alternate ) 
Superintending Surveyor of Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Works I ( DAZ ) 

Surveyor of Works ( IV ) ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright imder the said Act. 



IS : 10090 - 19B2 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri M. S. Vedi Evcrite Sales Corporation, New Delhi 

Shri R. S. Vedi ( Alternate ) 

Shri G. Raman, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 



Director ( Civ Bngg ) 



Secretary 

Shri S. Senoupta 
Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI 



Door and Window Fittings Subcommittee, BDC 15:1 

Convener 
Shri YuSuf Mowjee M. C. Mowjee & Company Private Ltd, Calcutta 

Members 

Shri Sahib Singh ( Alternate to 
Shri Yusuf Mowjee ) 
Shri D. S. Chauhan Regional Testing Centre ( Northern ) Ministry of 

Suva A. 'K. TiVGGAL { Alternate ) Industry 

Shri Jaswant Singh Eastern Commercial & Industrial Enterprises Pvt 

Ltd, Visakhapatnam 

Shri Ravi Mehra ( Alternate ) 
Shri Rakesh Kamboj Jayna Trading Corporation, Delhi 

Shri Nawal Kamboj ( Alternate ) 
Shri I. C. Khanna Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, Ministry 

of Supply, New Delhi 
Col p. G. Khanna Argent Industries, New Delhi 

Maj-Gen K. D. Chadha ( Alternate ) 
Shri Ajoyendu Paul Gobindo Sheet Metal Works & Foundry, Calcutta 

Shri Amitabh Paul ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. K. Punj Ministry of Railways, New Delhi 

Shri H. K. Rakhra Engineer-in-Chief 's Branch, Army Headquarters 

Shri B. D. Kshirsagar ( Alternate ) 
Surveyor of Works ( DAZ ) Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Shri M. S. Vedi Everite Sales Corporation, New Delhi 

Shri R. S. Vedi ( Alternate ) 



TS : 10090 - 1982 

Indian Standard 
SPECIFICATION FOR NUMERICALS 

0. FOREWORD 

0,1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 29 January 1982, after the draft finalized by the Builder's Hardware 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 

0,2 Numericals or figures made out of brass, bronze or aluminium are 
being extensively used in hotels, office complexes, hospitals and other 
public buildings for marking rooms, blocks, etc. This standard has been 
prepared with a view to laying down the essential requirements for the 
manufacture of such numericals. 

0.3 While issuing this standard, the Sectional Committee took note of 
the acute scarcity of materials like brass and bronze in the country and 
the need for conserving the use of the same in national interest. However, 
in view of the demand for numericals made out of these materials in the 
overseas markets, they have been included specifically to meet the require- 
ments of export trade. For all indigenous uses, it is recommended that 
numericals made out of these materials should not be used. 

0,4 This standard contains clauses 3.1, 4.1.2 and 5.1 which permit the 
purchaser to use his option for selection to suit his requirements. 

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing 
the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified values in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard specifies the requirements regarding materials, dimen- 
sions, mxanufacture and finish of num.ericais. 



*Rules for rounding off numericaJ values ( revised ). 

3 



IS : 10090 - 1982 

2. MATERIALS 

2,1 The materials used for the manufacture of numericals shall comply 
with the requirements given in Table I . 

TABLE 1 REQUIREMENTS FOR MATERIALS FOR NUMERICALS 

{Clause 2.1 ) 

Sl No. Materials Suitable Grade in Indian Standards 

(I) (2) (3) 

i) Cast Brass Grade 3 of IS : 292-1961* 

ii) Cast Bronze Grade 3 of IS : 305-1961t or 

Grade 4 of IS : 306-1968J or . 
Grade 3 of IS : 28.1975§ 

iii) Cast Aluminium Designation 5230 or 4600 of IS : 617-1975(1 

♦Specification for brass ingots and castings ( revised ). 
fSpecification for aluminium bronze ingots and castings ( revised ). 
JSpecification for tin bronze ingots and castings ( second revision ). 
§Specification for phosphor bronze ingots and castings ( third revision ). 
llSpecification for aluminium and aluminium alloy ingots and castings for general 
engineering purposes ( second revision ) . 

3. DESIGN AND SHAPE 

3.1 The design and shape of numericals shall be as agreed upon between 
the manufacturer and the purchaser. 

4. SIZE AND DIMENSIONS 

4.1 The numericals shall be of 25, 50, 75, 100, 150 and 300 mm size. 

4.1.1 The size shall be designated by the overall height of the numericals. 

4.1.2 The thickness of the numericals shall not be less than 2 mm, and 
the width shall be as agreed upon between the purchaser and the manu- 
facturer. 

5. MANUFACTURE 

5.1 The numericals shall be made of brass, bronze or aluminium as required 
by the purchaser. They shall be manufactured in one piece and shall be 
free from all defects. Provision of projecting lugs or pins at the back of the 
numericals shall be made for fixing. Alternatively, a minimum of two 
numbers of clean and countersunk screw holes shall be provided to suit 
countersunk wood screws No. 4 ( see IS : 6760-1972* ). All sharp edges 
and corners shall be removed. Special lugs to enable the numericals to 
project from the walls or doors shall be made if required by the purchaser. 



*Specification for slotted countersunk head wood screws. 

4 



IS : 10090 - 1982 

6. FINISH 

6.1 Brass and bronze numericals shall be finished smooth, and shall have 
bright or satin finish, or they shall be plated. They shall be suitably protected 
from discoloration. Aluminium numericals shall be anodized and the 
quality of anodized finish shall not be less than Grade AC 10 of IS : 1868- 
1968*. 

7. MARKING 

7.1 Each numerical shall be legibly and indelibly marked with the name 
of the manufacturer or his trade mark, if any. 

7.1.1 The numericals may also be marked with the ISI Certification 
Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions 
of the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules 
and Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an 
Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply 
with the requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated 
by the producer. ISI marked products are also continuously checked by ISI 
for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions 
under which a licence for the use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted 
to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards 
Institution. 

8. PACKING 

8*1 Numericals shall be individually wrapped with polythene paper or 
tissue paper and shall be packed in multiples in cardboard boxes. 

8.2 Each package shall bear the following information: 

a) SizCj 

b) Quantity, and 

c) Name of the manufacturer or his trade mark, if any. 

9. SCALE OF SAMPLING AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 

9.1 Lot — In any consignment all the numericals of the same shape, 
design, size and manufactured from the same material at the same time 
shall be grouped together to constitute a lot. 

9.2 Sample Size — The number of numericals to be selected from a lot 
shall depend on the size of the lot and shall be in accordance with col 1 
and 2 of Table 2. 



♦Specification for anodic coatings on aluminium {first revision), 

5 



IS : 10090 -1982 

9.2.1 These numerical shall be selected at random from at least 10 per 
cent of the packages subject to a minimum of three, equal number of 
numericals being selected from each such package. 

TABLE 2 SCALE OF SAMPUNG AND CWTERION FOR CONFORMITY 

( Clauses 9.2 and 9.4 ) 



l.OT Size 
(1) 


Sample Size 
(2) 


Permissible Number of Defectives 

(3) 


Up to 150 


5 





131 to 300 


20 


1 


301 to 500 


32 


2 


501 to 1000 


50 


3 


1001 and above 


80 


5 


9.3 Tests 







9.3.1 All the numericals selected as in 9.2 shall be checked for dimensional 
requirements ( see 4 ), defects in manufacture {see 5 ) and finish {see 6 ). 
Any numerical which fails to satisfy any one or more of these requirements 
shall be considered as a defective numerical. 

9.4 Criterion for Conformity 

9.4.1 A lot shall be considered as conforming to the requirements of 
this standard^ if the number of defective numericals among those 
tested does not exceed the corresponding number given in Col 3 of Table 2. 



