**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10061 (1991) : Proforma for analysis of unit rate of 
excavation of tunnels by cyclic drilling and blasting [WRD 
23: Measurement and Cost Analysis of Works For River Valley 
Projects] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi f 7ui^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 10061 : 1991 
( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 

( ^?n ^?TT>«TiT ) 

Indian Standard 

PROFORMA FOR ANALYSIS OF UNIT RATE 
OF EXCAVATION OF TUNNELS BY 
CYCLIC DRILLING AND BLASTING 

( First Revision ) 



UDC 69003-12: 624-19 1-2 



© BIS 1991 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

September 1991 Price Group 2 



Cost Analysis and Cost Estimates Sectional Committee, RVD 19 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Cost Analysis and Cost Estimates Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
River Valley Division Council. 

Tunnels are provided for various purposes such as for river diversion during construction of dams, 
pressure conduits to serve as penstocks for power house, pressure or free flow conduits in water carrier 
system, spillways and for rail and road transporation. Tunnelling may be either in rock or in soft 
ground or shield driven. The tunnelling costs depend not onlv on labour, machinery and materials of 
construction but also on the purpose of construction, types of rocks and soils bored through including 
physical defects of the geological formatijons, the number of entrances prx>vided for excavating the 
tunnel, etc. The cost of excavation of tunnels may vary therefore from place to place. To have a 
proper comparison of the unit rates of excavation of various tunnels, it is necessary to have uniformity 
in the analysis of the costs of different parameters which make up the unit rate, which has been brought 
out in this standard in the form of proforma. 

This standard was first published in 198^1. The revision of this standard has been taken up in the light 
of the experience gained during the last nine years in 1he use of this standard. This standard has 
been revised and additional items, required to be covered have been added. 



IS 10061 : 1991 



Indian Standard 



PROFORMA FOR ANALYSIS OF UNIT RATE 
OF EXCAVATION OF TUNNELS BY 
CYCLIC DRILLING AND BLASTING 

( First Revision ) 



1 SCOPE 

This standard lays down proforma for analysis of 
unit rate of tunnel excavation. It does not include 
provisions for tunnel lining. 

2 CLASSIFICATION 

For ease of comparison of unit rates of excavation 
of various tunnels, the following classification for 
tunnels should be adopted: 

a) Geological 

i) Tunnels in competent rock 
ii) Tunnels in incompetent rock 

b) Cross- Sections 
i) Up to 20 m^ 

ii) From 20 m^ to 40 ra^ 
iii) From 40 m^ to 70 m^ 
iv) Exceeding 70 m^ 

c) Method of Excavation 

i) Full face 

ii) Heading and benching 
iii) Multi-drift 

Unit cost for tunnel excavation for tunnels excav- 
ated by heading and benching method may be the 
average of unit cost of heading and unit cost of 
benching. The average will be weighted average 
depending upon the area of heading and benching. 

2.1 Technical Information 

The following pertinent technical information will 
also be helpful for a full appreciation of the 
circumstances under which the tunnel is excavated: 

1 . Name of the project 

2. Layout plan of the project 

3. Location with plan and L-section of the 
tunnel 

4. Purpose of the tunnel 



5. Construction Agency 

a) Departmental or contractor 

b) Name of department/contractor 

6. Shape of the tunnel ( circular, horse shoe, 
elliptical, vertical walled with arch roof ) 

7. Excavated size of the tunnel ( excavated 
dimensions to the pay-Hne ) 

8. Type of final lining 

9. Location plan and L-section of adits and 
shafts 



heading length ( shorter 
length 



10. a) Main tunnel 

limb ) 

b) Secondary tunnel — heading 
( shorter limb ) 

11. Description of alignment including mention 
of bends, transitions, approach channel, 
exit channel 

12. Types of rock bored ( igneous, sedimentary 
or metamorphic ) and physical properties 
such as compressive strength, abrasive value 
and modulus of elasticity 

13. Physical defects of rock formations (joints, 
faults, etc ) 

14. Ground water conditions, locations and 
quantity of seepage water at various periods 
of the year 

15. Description of rock cover, depressions and 
khuds crossing over the tunnel along its 
alignment 

16. Inflammable and abnoxious gases, if encoun- 
tered ( brief description ) 

17> Methods adopted for tackling tunnel exca- 
vation ( full face; heading and benching; 
multiple drifting; pilot tunnel; forepoling; 
providing double steel ribs and invert struts; 
etc ) 

a) Reaches of competent rock strata 

b) Reaches of incompetent rock strata 
( sheared and fractured ) 



IS 10061 : 1991 



c) Reaches with inadequate rock cover and 
adverse ground water conditions 

d) Reaches showing rock distress 

c) Reaches of bad rock strata causing break 
through conditions 

f ) Any other adverse geological conditions. 
18. Equipment at each tunnel heading 

a) Drill Jumbo 
Type 

Overall dimensions 
Number of decks 
Motive power 

b) Drilling machines (hydro-booms; 
ladder drilling system with fast rock 
drills; other drills ) 

Number and Type 

c) Drill steel and drill bits ( a brief des- 
cription ) 

d) Mucking machine 
Make and model 
Capacity 
Motive power 

^Number of mucking machine 

e) Haulage equipment 1 Number, make, 
Locos-Diesel/Electric >inodel and 
Rubber tyred carriers } capacity 



f) Muck trucks 
Mine cars/diesel/ 

electric 
Rubber tyred carriers J 



Number, make, 
model and 
capacity 



g) Ventilation 

i) Diameter of ventilation duct 
Make, model, type and capacity of 
main blowers 
Spacing of main blowers 

ii) Same as above in case of exhaust 
blowers — at the face inside the 
tunnel and spacing 

h) Pumping arrangements inside the tunnel 
Number of pumps — main/feeder 
Type of pumps 
Capacity of pumps 
Spacing of pumps 

Length, size and nature of pipelines- 
main/feeder 

j) Tunnel supporting arrangement 

k) Communication arrangement inside 
and outside 

m) Instruments for monitoring 

n) Instruments for determining stresses 
inrock 



p) Location and lead of dump yard from 
portal 

19. Air supply — Installed capacity of com- 
pressors pipe size 

Water supply — Capacity of tank, pipe 
size, length, etc. 

20. Electrification 
Main supply voltage 
Tranformer details 
Spacing 

Lighting voltage 

Trolley line rectification ( in case of electric- 
traction ) 

Firing voltage 

21. Excavation data ( in reaches of competent 
rock strata ) 

a) Type of strata 

Average number of drill holes and size 

of holes per round 
Type of cut-holes pattern 
Number and size of cut-holes 
Average depth of drill-holes 
Average actual advance 
Type of explosive and detonators used 
Quantity of explosive used per round 
Explosive factor ( kg/m^ ) 

b) Time Cycle 

Moving drill jumbo up to ... ( h Min) 
the face and drilling the 
round 

Average drilling rate ..• ( cms per Min ) 

Loading the round; ... ( h Min ) 

removing drill jumbo from 
the face firing the circuits 

Smoke clearance time ... ( Min ) 

Advancing mucking machine ( h Min ) 
to the muck pile, scaling 
down loose rocks and 
mucking out 

Time for installation of steel 
supports sets 

Time for secondary blast- ... ( h Min ) 
ing and muck removal 

Number of sets installed 

Spacing of sets 

Time for installation ... ( h Min ) 

Time for lagging and ... ( Min ) 

blocking 

OR 



IS 10061 : 1991 



Time for shotcreting/ ... (Min) a) Length of reach 

guniting/installing weld r p r» *o, \ „ * 

mesh and rock bolts ( R. D. .. to ) ...metres 

( in case steel supports Geological description of tunnelling 

are not considered condition time taken to tunnel 

necessary ) through ...( days ) 

Average time lost due to ... (hMin) b) and so on 

hold ups/derailments in ^c t^ . e . ^ , . 

case rail mounted equip- 25. Date of commencement and completion of 

mentis used tunnel excavation 

Average cycle time for ... (h) 26. Monthly progress from the date of start of 

advance A excavation to completion of excavation. 
Overall advance in a month (metres) 

Year Month Progress Tunnelling 

Maximum overbrcak . . . ( cm ) in metres condition 

Average overbreak ... ( cm ) ( R.D....to... ) 

Percentage overbreak of the 27. Incentive payment ... a brief description 

excavation of pay line ... % schemes for tunnel and results obtained 

crews ( if introduced ) 

^^" ,?thelnnel T?nr«nV'* ^n'ZTf^l 28. Industrial disputcs ... a brief description 

m the tunnel Type and m the total / ir ^-„ % '^ ^^ j +1, -^ ^ivS* ^« 

spacing of steel ribs length of ^ '^ ^^^ ^ „ro JL ' 

tunnel progress 

., i, segmental .ypenb. % ^'^ fnSiSnS 

ii) Portal type ribs % medical and rescue 

operations 

b) i) Rib spacing 300 to 600 mm % ^ 

ii) Rib spacing more than 30. Accidents during tunnelling 

600 and up to 900 mm % Fatal accidents ... No of persons dead 

c) iii) Rib spacing more than Major accidents .•• No of persons 

900 and up to 1 200 mm % disabled 

iv) Rib spacing more than Reasons of ... A broad split up be 

1 200 and up to I 500 mm ......% accidents given 

23. a) Percent of tunnel unsupported % ^l. Geological forecast .. Current forecast ...% 

r^ , ^ of Strata and that A brief description 

Percent of tunnel supported actually obtained outlining the major 

( steel ribs ) ,4 during tunnelling variations be given. 

Percent of tunnel supported ^#> t*c.«««c uo,.«f 

( rock bolts ) % 32* ^^'*^"* ^^^'"* 

Percent of tunnel supported 3 PROFOMA FOR ANALYSIS OF UNIT RATE 

( Precast or pre-stresscd OF COST FOR TUNNEL EXCAVATION 

segmental lining ) % ^^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 

3.1 The proforma recommended for use in anal- 

24. Tunnelling in very poor/distress/cavity ysis of unit rate of tunnel excavation is as given 
reaches ia Table 1. 



IS 10061 : 1991 



Table 1 Proforma for Analysis of Unit Rate of Excavation of Tunne] 

(Clause 3,1 ) 



SI No. Item 

(1) (2) 



Jnit 


Quantity 


Rate 


Amount 


Remarks 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


(7) 



i) Drilling 

a) Machinery and equipment excJuding air 
operating cost 

b) Compressed air 

c) Other material 

d) Labour 

ii) Blasting 

a) Machinery and equipment 

b) Material 

c) Labour 

iii) Scaling, Mucking and Disposal 

a) Scaling 

b) Machinery and equipment 

c) Labour 

iv) Shotcreting/Guniting/Rock bolting and Consolid- 
ation grouting 

a) Shotcreting 

b) Guniting 

c) Rock bolting 

d) Consolidation grouting 

e) Labour 

v) Supports and Lagging 

a) Machinery and equipment 

b) Material 

c) Labour 

vi) Facilities 

a) Ventilation 

b) Surveying 

c) Lighting 

d) Dcwatering 

e) Communication 

f) Instrumentation 

g) Tracks 

h) Miscellaneous items 

vii) Ancillaries and Incidentals 

a) Construction of the following: 

1) Labour and staff quarters 

2) Service roads 

3) Electric power supply 

4) Water supply system 

5) Sanitation system 

6) Drainage system 

7) Other amenties including first-aid, medical 
facilities and safety arrangements and 
rescue operations 

b) Maintenance/operation of items mentioned 
above 

c) Supervisory works establishment 
viii) Quality control 

ix) Contingencies 
x) Overload ( excluding profit ) 

This would include establishment, office stationery, general tools and plant, staff cars, their running and 
maintenance, insurance, workman's compensation, statutory benefits, telephone and telecommunication facilities 
interest liabilities on borrowings from the owner and bank guarantee charges etc. 
NOTE — All items mentioned above shall include depreciation, erection, operation, repairs and mainten- 
ance and dismantling of machinery where used. All items of labour mentioned above shall include indirect 
statuatory and other benefits payable to the labour. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions cf the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark 
on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been 
produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system 
of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and 
operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by 
BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under 
which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced 
in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, 
in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbcls and sizes, type 
or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director 
(Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if 
any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in 
possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be 
sent to BIS giving the following reference: 

Doc : No. RVD 19 ( 34 ) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all OflSces ) 



(311 01 31 
|331 13 75 



Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 37 86 62 

CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 53 38 43 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 235 02 16 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 6 32 92 95 

BOMBAY 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAll^aHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORE, 
FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUJl, 
PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Printwell Printers, Aligarh, India 



