**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 10070 (1982) : Specification for machine for abrasion 
testing of coarse aggregates [CED 2: Cement and Concrete] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



IS: 10070-1902 

( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 



li>L _f '_ r*|_ J 



SPECIFICATION FOR MACHINE FOR ABRASION 
TESTING OF COARSE AGGREGATES 



UDC 666972123 : 620-178 k U-O5 




© Copyright J 982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK 15 El. WAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZATAB. MARO 

NEW DELHI I UHKI2 



Ma Hs^^^m Gi, 2 *«>'« 2 




IS : 100?0 - 1982 



Indian Standard 



SPECIFICATION FOR MACHINE FOR ABRASION 
TESTING OF COARSE AGGREGATES 

Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee, BDC 2 



Chairman 

Dr H. C. Visvesvaraya 

Members 

Additional Director, Stan- 
dards ( B&S ) 

Deputy Director , Stan- 
dards ( B&S ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. P. Banerjee 



Shri Harish N. Malani ( Alternate ) 



Representing 
Cement Research Institute of India, New Delhi 

Research, Designs & Standards Organization 
( Ministry of Railways ), Lucknow 



Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay 



Shri S. K. Banerjee 
Shri R. N. Bansal 

Shri T. C. Garg ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. V. Chalapathi Rao 

Shri S. Roy ( Alternate ) 
Chief Engineer ( Designs ) 

Executive Engineer 
( Designs ) III ( Alternate ) 
Chief Engineer ( Projects ) 

Director, IPRI ( Alternate ) 
Director ( CSMRS ) 



National Test House, Calcutta 

Beas Designs Organization, Nangal Township 

Geological Survey of India, Calcutta 

Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 



Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab, 
Chandigarh 



Central Soil and Materials Research Station, 
New Delhi 
Deputy Director. ( CSMRS ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. A. E. D'Sa The Concrete Association of India, Bombay 

Shri N. C. Duggal ( Alternate ) 

Hyderabad Asbestos Cement Products Ltd, 

Hyderabad 
Engineer-in-Chief 's Branch, Army Headquarters, 
New Delhi 



Shri A. K. Gupta 
Shri V. K. Gupta 



Shri S. N. PandE ( Alternate ) 
Dr R. R. Hattiangadi 

Shri P. J.Jagus ( Alternate ) 
Dr Iqbal Ali 
Shri S. R. Kulkarni 



The Associated Cement Companies Ltd, Bombay 

Engineering Research Laboratories, Hyderabad 
M. N. Dastur & Co Pvt Ltd, Calcutta 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1982 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS » 10070 -1982 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri S. K. Laha The Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta 

Shri B. T. Unwalla ( Alternate ) 
Dr Mohan Rai Central Building Research Institute (CSIR), 

Roorkee 
Dr S. S. Rehsi ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. K. Nambiar In personal capacity ( * Ramanalaya ' 77 First 

Crescent Park Road 9 Gandhinagar f Adyar, Madras ) 
Shri H. S. Pasricha Hindustan Prefab Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri C. S. Mishra ( Alternate ) 
Shri Y. R. Phull Central Road Research Institute ( CSIR ), New 

Delhi 
Shri M. R. Chatterjee ( Alternate I ) 
Shri K. L. Sethi ( Alternate II ) 
Dr M. Ramaiah Structural Engineering Research Centre ( CSIR ), 

Roorkee 
Dr N. S. Bhal ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. Ramdas Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, 

New Delhi 
Dr A. V. R. Rao National Buildings Organization, New Delhi 

Shri J. Sen Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. N. S. Rao Gammon India Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. R. Pinheiro ( Alternate ) 
Representative Indian Roads Congress, 'New Delhi 

Shri Arjun Rijiisinghani Cement Corporation of India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri K, Vithal Rao ( Alternate ) 
Secretary Central Board of Irrigation and Power, New 

Delhi 
Deputy Secretary ( I ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Sivaguru Roads Wing, Ministry of Shipping and Transport, 

New Delhi 
Shri R. L. Kapoor ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. A. Subramaniam The India Cements Ltd, Madras 

Shri P. S. Ramachandran ( Alternate) 
Superintending Engineer Public Works Department, Government of Tamil- 
( Designs ) Nadu, Madras 

Executive Engineer ( SM&R 
Division ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri L. Swaroop Dalmia Cement ( Bharat ) Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri A. V. Ramana ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. Raman, Director General, ISI ( Ex*officio Member ) 

Director ( Civ Engg ) 

Secretary 

Shri M. N. Neelakandhan 
Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI 



( Continmd on page 1 ) 



18 : 10070 - 1982 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR MACHINE FOR ABRASION 
TESTING OF COARSE AGGREGATES 

0. FOREWORD 

0*1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institu- 
tion on 28 January 1982, after the draft finalized by the Cement and 
Concrete Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineer- 
ing Division Council. 

0.2 The Indian Standards Institution has already published a series of 
standards on methods of testing cement and concrete. It has been recog- 
nized that reproducible and repeatable test results can be obtained only 
with standard testing equipment capable of giving the desired level of 
accuracy. The Sectional Committee has, therefore, decided to bring out 
a series of specifications covering the requirements of equipment used for 
testing cement and concrete, to encourage their development and manu- 
facture in the country. 

0.3 Accordingly, this standard has been prepared to cover requirements 
of the machine used for testing abrasion value of coarse aggregates. The 
method of determining abrasion value of coarse aggregate is covered in 
IS: 2386 (Part IV )-1963*. 

0.4 In the formulation of this standard, due weightage has been given to 
international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing 
in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field 
in this country. 

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, express- 
ing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS : 2-1960f. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in 
this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard specifies the requirements of the machine used for 
testing abrasion value of coarse aggregate. 

♦Methods of test for aggregates for concrete: Part IV Mechanical properties. 
tRules for rounding off numerical values { revised ) . 



IS 1 10070 - 1982 



2. MACHINE 

2.1 The machine shall be of Los Angeles type. 

3; MATERIALS 

3.1 Materials for different components of the abrasion machine shall be 
as given in Table 1. 



TABLE I MATERIALS OF CONSTRUCTION FOR ABRASION 




MACHINE ( LOS ANGELES TYPE ) 




Si, Pabt 


Material 


Special 


Recommended 


No. 




Requirements, 


Indian Standard 






IE ANY 


Specification, 

IE ANY 


<1) (2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


i) Cylinder 


Mild steel 


Smooth surface 


IS : 226-1975* 


ii) Stub shaft 


Mild steel 


Smooth surface 


do 


iii) Cover for 


Mild steel 


Smooth surface 


do 


opening 








iv) Shelf 


Mild steel 


Smooth surface 


do 


v) Frame 


Structural 
steel sections 


— 


— 


vi) Ball bearing, 


— 


50 mm bore 


— 


heavy duty 








vii) Motor 


— - 


1 hp, 3 phase, 
1440 rpm 


— 


viii) Tray 


Mild steel 


— 


IS : 226-1975* 


ix) Abrasive charge 


Cast iron 
spheres 


Hardened 


— 


♦Specification for structural steel ( standard quality ) (fifth revision ). 



4. DIMENSIONS 

4.1 The dimensions with tolerances shall be as given in Fig. 1. Where 
tolerances are not specified, the dimensions shall be considered as 
nominal. 

Note — The allowable deviations for nominal dimensions shall be as laid down 
for coarse class of deviation in IS : 2102-1969*. 

5. CONSTRUCTION 

5.1 Abrasion Machine ( Los Angeles Type ) — The abrasion machine 
( Los Angeles type ) shall be constructed as shown in Fig. 1 and shall 



♦Allowable deviations for dimensions without specified tolerances (first revision ). 



IS : 1007a- 1982 



consist of a hollow steel cylinder arranged for rotating about its axis 
horizontal position. 



in a 




CAST IRON OR ROLLED STEEL 
ENDS NOT LESS THAN 12mm THICK; 



PREFERRED DESIGN 
OF PUATE SHELf AND COVER 

NOT LESS THAN 1250mm MEASURED 
ON OUTSIDE OF DRUM; 




DIRECTION 
OF ROTATION 



- CATCH PAN 
FOR SPECIMEN 




Note — Shaft bearing shall be mounted on concrete piers or other rigid supports. 
All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 1 Typical Abrasion Testing Machine ( Los Angeles Type ) 

; 5.1.1 The hollow cylinder shall be made of steel with its ends closed. 
The cylinder shall be mounted on stub shafts attached to both the ends 
but not entering it. Ball bearings housed in brackets shall be mounted 
over the shafts and the brackets shall be fixed to the frame as shown in 
Fig. 1. An opening shall also be provided. A removable steel shelf pro- 
jecting radially into the cylinder and extending its full length shall be 
mounted along one element of the interior surface of the cylinder. The 
shelf shall be so mounted by bolts as to be firm and rigid. The position 



IS tl0070-1982 

of the shelf shall be such that the distance from the shelf to the opening 
measured along the circumference of the cylinder in the direction of 
rotation shall be not less than 1 250 mm. 

5*1*2 Removable Cover — A removable cover shall be provided to close 
the opening on the cylinder dust-tight and this shall be bolted in place. 
The removable cover shall be made of steel and shall be formed to 
maintain the cylindrical contour of the interior surface. 

5.1.3 Shelf— The shelf shall be of mild steel. 

5.1.4 Frame — The frame shall be of welded structural steel cons- 
truction. A channel carrying the motor and gear box shall be fixed 
rigidly to the frame. 

5.1.5 Drive — The drive should be by means of a chain running over a 
sprocket on the stub shaft and a sprocket on the shaft of a gear box 
coupled to a motor ( 1 hp, 3 phase, 1 440 rpm ). A clutch shall be 
provided. A revolution counter shall be provided to indicate the number 
of revolutions. The rate of rotation of the cylinder shall be 30-33 rpm. 

Note — It is desirable to equip the drive with a 'power supply cut-off type 
revolution counter which stops the machine after completing the specified number 
of revolutions. 

5.1.6 Tray — A tray with lifting handles shall be provided. 

5.1.7 Abrasive Charge — The abrasive charge shall consist of 12 cast 
iron spheres 48 + 2 mm in diameter and each weighing between 390 and 
455 g and a total of 12 numbers of spheres weighing 5 000 ± 25 g shall 
be supplied. 

6. MARKING 

6.1 The following information shall be clearly and indelibly marked on 
each component of the abrasion machine in a way that it does not 
interfere with the performance of the machine. 

a) Name of the manufacturer or his registered trade-mark or both, 
and 

b) Date of manufacture. 

6.1.1 The aggregate testing machine may also be marked with the ISI 
Certification Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of 
the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and 
Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the 
requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and 
quality control which is devised and, supervised by ISI and operated by the 
producer, ISI marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity 
to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence 
for the use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution, 



IS 1 160?0 • 198$ 



( Continued from page 2 ) 



Instruments for Cement and Concrete Testing 
Subcommittee, BDG 2 : 10 



Convener 
Dr Iqbal Ali 

Members 
Shri P. D. Agarwal 

Dr T. N. ChoJer ( Alternate ) 
Prof B. M. Arttja 
Shri T. P. Ekambaram 
Shri H. K. Guha 

Deputy Secretary ( Alternate ) 
Shri P.J. Jagus 

Shri D. A, Wadia ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. R. Joshi 



Representing 
Engineering Research Laboratories, Hyderabad 

Public Works Department, Government of Uttar 
Pradesh, Lucknow 

Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 
Highways Research Station, Madras 
All India Instruments Manufacturers and Dealers 
Association, Bombay 

The Associated Cement Companies Ltd, Bombay 



Research & Development Organization ( Ministry 
of Defence ), Pune 
Shri Y. P. Pathak ( Alternate ) 
Shri E. K. Ramaohandban National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri S. K. Banerjee ( Alternate ) 
Prof C. K. Ramesh Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay 

Dr R. S. Ayyar ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. V. Ranga Rao Cement Research Institute of India, New Delhi 

Dr K. G. Narakg ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. S. Rehsi Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), 

Roorkee 
Shri J. P. Kacshish ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. V. S. R. Sastri Associated Instrument Manufacturers (India ) 

Private Ltd, New Delhi 
Shri Subhash Sharma ( Alternate } 
Shri K. L. Sethi Central Road Research Institute ( CSIR ), New 

Delhi 
Shri M. L. Bhatia ( Alternate) 



INDIAN STANDARDS 

ON 

INSTRUMENTS FOR TESTING CEMENT AND CONCRETE 

IS: 

5512-1969 Flow table for use in tests of hydraulic cement and pozzolanic materials 

5513-1976 Vicat apparatus {first revision ) 

5514-1969 Apparatus used in * Le-Chatelier ' test 

5515-1969 Compaction factor apparatus 

5516-1969 Variable flow type air permeability apparatus ( Blaine type ) 

5536-1969 Constant flow type air permeability apparatus ( Lea and Nurse type ) 

5816-1970 Methods of test for splitting tensile strength of concrete cylinders 

7320-1974 Concrete slump test apparatus 

7325-1974 Apparatus for determining constituents of fresh concrete 

9376-1979 Apparatus for measuring aggregate crushing value and 10 percent fines 

value 

9377-1979 Apparatus for aggregate impact value 

9399-1979 Apparatus for flexural testing of concrete 

9459-1980 Apparatus for use in measurement of length change of hardened cement 

paste, mortar and concrete 

9799-1981 Pressure meter for determination of air content in freshly mixed concrete 



