**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live" 


IS  10029  (1981) :  Methods  for  sensory  evaluation  of 
sweetened  condensed  milk  [FAD  19:  Dairy  Products  and 
Equipment] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New' 


■K^y  / 1  juaaaws^fea  rs^^TTF^ 


2*S<  W I  *>S*V2^NK^ 


^frcvvv^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


.^^_ 


• 


BLANK  PAGE 


*rt*2V^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


Indian  Standard 


IS:  10039-  1981 

(Reaffirmed  2002) 


METHOD  FOR 

SENSORY  EVALUATION  OF 

SWEETENED  CONDENSED  MILK 


UDC    G37-H2-42 :  54392 


®  Coftnght  \9®1 

INDIAN     STANDARDS     INSTITUTION 

MANAK     lill.WAN,     9     BAHADUR    SHAH    2  AFAR     MARG 

NEW  DELHI   IIQD02 


2at'@*  • 


Ftbruarx  1982 


IS  :  10029  •  1981 


Indian  Standard 


METHOD  FOR 

SENSORY  EVALUATION  OF 

SWEETENED  CONDENSED  MILK 

Sensory  Evaluation  Sectional  Committee,  AFDC  38 

Chairman 

Shri  M.  R.  Srinivasan 
4\5  W,E.A.y  Karol  Bagh,  Mew  Delhi 

Members  Representing 

Agricultural       Marketing    Directorate  of  Marketing  &  Inspection  (  Ministry 
Adviser   to   the    Government  of  Rural  Reconstruction),  Faridabad 

or  India 

Shri  T.  V.  Mathew  (  Alternate ) 
Shri  D.  S.  Chadha  Central  Committee  for  Food  Standards  (  DGHS  ), 

Ministry  of  Health  &  Family  Welfare,  New 
Delhi 
Shri  M.  R.  Chandrasekhara  Protein  Foods  &  Nutrition  Development  Associa- 

tion of  India,  Bombay 
Shri  Om  P.  Dhamija  Export  Inspection  Council  of  India,  Cochin 

Director  or  Research  Coffee  Board,  Bangalore 

Cuptaster  ( Alternate ) 
Shrimati  Harsimrat  Kaur  Gill       The  Punjab  Dairy  Development  Corporation  Ltd, 

Chandigarh 
Shri  V.  S.  Govindarajan  In    personal    capacity    ( 2707,    1st    Main    Road, 

Mysore ) 
Shri  K.  L.  Gupta  Tea  Board,  Calcutta 

Dr  S.  K.  Gupta  National     Dairy    Research     Institute     ( ICAR ), 

Karnal 
Dr  B.  N.  Mathur  (  Alternate) 
Maj  Jasdeep  Singh  Defence  Food  Research  Laboratory,  Mysore 

Shri  N.  Srinivasalu  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  E.  K,  J ayanar ayan an  Mohan  Meakin  Ltd,  Ghaziabad 

Dr  D.  K,  Jha  Yezdi  Distilleries,  Mysore 

Col  R.  K.  Kochhar  Quarter   Master  General's  Branch,  Army  Head- 

quarters, New  Delhi 
Lt-Col  P.J.  Cherian  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  Vittal  Mallya  United  Breweries  Ltd,  Bangalore 

Shri  N.J.  Menon  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  N.  Jandarana  Menon  McDowell  &  Co  Ltd,  Shertally 

Dr  A.  G.  Naik  Kurade  Suman  Food  Consultants,  New  Delhi 

(  Continued  on  page  2  ) 


©  Copyright  1982 
INDIAN  STANDARDS  INSTITUTION 

This  publication  is  protected  under  the  Indian  Copyright  Act  (  XIV  of  1957  )  and 
reproduction  in  whole  or  in  part  by  any  means  except  with  written  permission  of  the 
publisher  shall  be   deemed  to  be  an  infringement  of  copyright  under  the    said  Act 


IS  :  10029 -1981 


(  Continued  from  page  1  ) 

Members 

Shri  S.  N.  Pandey 

Shri  B.  L.  Khanna  (  Alternate  ] 

Dfl  (  SHRIMATI  )   P.  PUSHPAMME 

Da  (  Shrimati  )  P.  Geervani 
(  Alternate  ) 
Dr  K.  G.  RaCxHUveek 

Shri  C.  K.  Ramnath 
Brio  P.  G.  S.  Sagera 

Shri  Y.  G.  Vaidya 

Shri  S.  B.  Sule  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  R.  Walter 

Shri  A.  K.  Roy  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  T.  Purnanandam, 

Director  (  Agri  &  Food  )  ( Secretary  ) 


Representing 
All  India  Distillers  Association,  New  Delhi 

College     of    Home     Science,      Andhra     Pradesh 
Agricultural  University,  Hyderabad 

Central   Food  Technological   Research    Institute, 

(CSIR),  Mysore 
Brooke  Bond  India  Ltd,  Bangalore 
Technical  Standardization  Committee    (  Ministry 

of  Agriculture  ),  New  Delhi 
Naarden  India  Ltd,  Bombay 

Food  Specialities  Ltd,  Moga 

Director  General,  ISI  (  Ex-officio  Member) 


Sensory  Evaluation  of  Dairy  Products  Subcommittee,  AFDG  38  :  2 


Convener 
Du  S.  K,  Gupta 


National     Dairy     Research     Institute     (ICAR), 
Karnal 


Members 
Agricultural      Marketing     Directorate  of  Marketing  &  Inspection  (Ministry 
Apviser   to   the   Government  of  Rural  Reconstruction),  Faridabad 

of  India 

Director  of  Laboratories  (  Alternate  ) 


All  India  Mawa  Vyapar  Sangh,  New  Delhi 
Punjab       Dairy        Development        Corporation, 

Chandigarh 
In     personal     capacity     ( 2701,     1st    Main   Road, 

Mysore  ) 
Delhi  Milk  Scheme,  New  Delhi 
Punjab  Agricultural  University,  Ludhiana 
The      Andhra      Pradesh      Dairy      Development 

Corporation  Ltd,  Hyderabad 
Kaira  District  Cooperative  Milk  Producers'  Union 

Ltd,  Anand 
Gujarat   Cooperative  Milk  Marketing  Federation 

Ltd,  Anand 
Andhra  Pradesh  Dairy  Development  Corporation, 
Hyderabad 
Shri  K.  Madhava  Rao  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  A.  K.  Roy  Food  Specialities  Ltd,  Moga 

Shri  M.  M.  Sobti  Haryana   Dairy    Development   Corporation    Ltd, 

Chandigarh 
Shri  R.  K.  Chhabra  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  R.  K.  Tripathi  Quarter   Master  General's  Branch,  Army  Head- 

quarters, New  Delhi 
MaJ  K.  G.  Nair  (  Alternate  ) 


Shri  Chunni  Lal 
Shri  B.  M.  L.  Garg 

ShriV.  S.  Govindarajan 

Shri  K.  S.  Gunnery 

Dr  S.  C.Jain 

Dr  V.  Jaswanta  Rao 

Shri  C.  E.  Obed 

Dr  I.  M.  Patel 

Dr  M.  Purnachandra  Rao 


IS  :  10029  -  1981 

Indian  Standard 

METHOD  FOR 

SENSORY  EVALUATION  OF 

SWEETENED  CONDENSED  MILK 

0.     FOREWORD 

0.1  This  Indian  Standard  was  adopted  by  the  Indian  Standards 
Institution  on  31  December  1981,  after  the  draft  finalized  by  the  Sensory 
Evaluation  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Agricultural 
and  Food  Products  Division  Council. 

0.2  Sweetened  condensed  milk  commonly  sold  in  tin  cans  is  judged  on 
the  basis  of  its  sensory  characteristics,  such  as  the  appearance  of  the 
surface  layer  of  the  product,  colour,  body  and  texture  and  flavour.  This 
standard  specifies  an  acceptable  procedure  for  sensory  evaluation  of 
sweetened  condensed  milk.  It  is  expected  that  this  will  prove  helpful  to 
manufacturers  and  consumers  for  evaluating  the  product  for  its  sensory 
properties  on  a  rational  basis. 

0.3  This  standard  is  complementary  to  IS  :  1166-1973*. 

0.4  In  reporting  the  result  of  a  test  or  analysis  made  in  accordance  with 
this  standard,  if  the  final  value,  observed  or  calculated,  is  to  be  rounded 
off,  it  shall  be  done  in  accordance  with  IS  :  2-1960f. 


1.  SCOPE 

1.1  This     standard     prescribes     conditions,     technique,     method      and 
evaluation  card  for  the  sensory  evaluation  of  sweetened  condensed  milk. 


1  For  the  purpose  of  this  standard,  the  following  definitions  in  addition 
►  those  given  in  IS  :  5126  (  Part  I  )-1969J  and  IS  :  5126  ( Part  II  )-1969§ 


2.  TERMINOLOGY 

2 

to  those  given 
shall  apply. 

*  Specification  for  condensed  milk  {first  revision). 
tRules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  (  revised). 

JGlossary  of  general  terms  for  sensory  evaluation  of  foods  :  Part  I  Methodology. 
§Glossary    of  general    terms    for    sensory    evaluation    of  foods :  Part    II    Quality 
characteristics. 


IS  :  10029  -  1981 

2.1.1  Strong —  It  is  a  flavour  defect,  which  is  suggestive  of  caramelized 
sugar  and  is  usually  accompanied  by  browner  tint  to  the  natural  colour. 

2.1.2  Buttons-Lumpy  —  It  is  a  body  defect  which  is  characterized  by  the 
presence  of  round  and  firm  lumps  with  stale  odour  at  the  surface  of  the 
product. 

2.1.3  Gassy — Resulting  from  gas  formation  by  yeast  in  the  product, 
this  defect  is  recognized  by  bloated  or  huffed  can  and  a  yeasty  odour. 
Such  products  shall  not  be  tasted. 

2.1.4  Sandy,  Coarse  Mealy — A  textural  defect  in  which  the  product 
lacks  smoothness  and  is  felt,  in  the  mouth.  This  is  caused  by  the 
decrease  in  crystallization  of  lactose. 

2.1.5  Settled — It  is  a  defect  when  some  solid  deposits  in  the  form  of  a 
layer  on  the  bottom  of  the  cans 

2.1.6  Thickened — This  is  a  body  defect  which  is  manifest  by  a  gel 
formation. 

2.1.7  Fat  Separation  —  This  defect  occurs  on  the  form  of  a  fatty  film  on 
the  bottom  surface  which  is  in  contact  with  the  product. 

2.1.8  Fruitiness  — Flavour  defect  of  microbial  origin. 

3.  GENERAL  CONDITIONS 

3.1  The  general  conditions  for  sensory  evaluation  of  sweetened  condensed 
milk  shall  be  as  given  in  IS  :6273  (  Part  I  )-1971*. 

4.  PANELISTS 

4.1  Selection   of  Panelists  —  The  guidelines  for  selection  of  panelists 
given  in  IS  :  8140-1976f  may  be  followed. 

4.2  Training 

4.2.1  Preparation  of  Sweetened  Condensed  Milk  Samples  for  Training  —  A 
control  sample  of  freshly  prepared  sweetened  condensed  milk  representing 


*  Guide  for  sensory  evaluation  of  foods  :  Part  I  Optimum  requirements. 
fGuide  for  selection  of  panel  for  sensory  evaluation  of  foods  and  beverages. 


IS  :  10029  -  1981 

all   the   desirable   sensory   characteristics   should    be   served   along  with 
defects  prepared  as  follows: 

a)  Metallic  —  Prepare  0*5  percent  solution  of  ferrous  sulphate  in 
distilled  water.  Add  1,  4  and  7  mi  of  the  solution  to  100  g  fresh 
sweetened  condensed  milk  and  mix  well  to  simulate  varying 
degrees  of  metallic  flavour  in  it. 

b)  Rancid  —  Homogenize  30  percent  fat  cream  obtained  from  raw 
milk,  allow  it  to  stay  at  about  37°C  for  about  1  hour  before 
heating  it  to  nearly  75°C  and  immediately  cooling  it  to  room 
temperature.  Mix  the  cream  with  fresh  sweetened  condensed 
milk  at  the  rate  of  10,  20  and  50  percent  to  obtain  varying 
degrees  of  rancidity  in  the  product. 

c)  Strong,  caramel  —  Heat,  in  a  boiling  water  bath,  fresh  sweetened 
condensed  milk  (70  to  80  g)  to  85-90°C  and  leave  it  covered 
at  about  90°C  for  2£,  Z\  and  4£  hours,  before  cooling  to  room 
temperature.  This  will  also  give  varying  degrees  of  browning  in 
in  the  product. 

d)  Tallowy  —  Expose  fresh  sweetened  condensed  milk,  containing 
approximately  5  mg/kg  of  ferric  or  cupric  chloride  to  sunlight  to 
varying  periods  such  as  3,  6  and  9  hours, 

e)  Sandy,  coarse,  mealy  —  Heat  the  fresh  sample  (  about  200  g  )  in  a 
beaker  at  about  70°G  for  5  minutes  and  hold  it  undisturbed  in 
an  incubator  at  30°C  for  6,  12  and  18  hours  to  manipulate 
different  degrees  of  sandiness  in  the  product. 

f)  Settled  —  Heat  the  sample  as  mentioned  in  (e)  above  and 
maintain  in  an  incubator  at  30°C  for  24,  48  and  72  hours. 

g)  Thickened  —  For  developing  varying  degrees  of  the  defect,  heat  a 
fresh  sample  of  condensed  milk  in  a  water  bath  to  80°C.  As  an 
alternative  for  developing  this  defect  packed  commodities 
samples  of  tins  can  be  stored  at  37°C  for  a  period  varying 
between  30  to  90  days. 

4.2.2  Procedure  for  Training  —  The  panelists  should  be  familiarized  with 
all  characteristics  of  fresh  sweetened  condensed  milk  prepared  under 
ideal  conditions.  They  should  also  be  trained  to  detect  and  discriminate 
against  likely  defects  in  the  product  with  respect  to  its  colour,  appearance, 
body,  texture  and  flavour. 

4.2.2.1  A  series  of  20  judgements  should  be  obtained  from  each 
prospective  panelist  for  each  defect  with  known  differences  at  levels 
perceived  as  definite.  To  compensate  for  the  known  day  to  day 
variations,  qualifying  test  should  be  given  for  a  3-day  period.  Those  who 
make  an  acceptable  score  (  75  percent  correct )  should  be  selected. 


IS  :  10029  -  1981 

4.3  The  panelists  shall  be  checked  once  every  three  months  for  their 
acuity  and  consistency. 

4.4  Number  of  Panelists  —  Minimum  of  five  persons  should  be 
employed.     A  minimum  of  10  judgements  may  be  taken  using  the  panel. 

5.  SAMPLING,  PREPARATION  AND  PRESENTATION 

5.1  Sampling  —  A  representative  sample  should  be  drawn  from  the  lot 
to  be  examined  (see  IS:  1166-1973*  ).  Precautions  should  be  exercised 
to  avoid  any  extraneous  contamination  in  drawing,  handling  and 
presenting  the  samples. 

5.2  Preparation  of  Samples  —  The  sample  can  should  be  placed  on 
the  table  in  the  same  position  as  it  was  prior  to  examination.  While  a 
small  size  can  should  be  sufficient,  the  product  after  visual  examination 
should  be  served  to  panelists  in  25  g  quantities  in  50  ml  beakers  along 
with  the  cans  present  simultaneously,  so  the  judges  can  see  for  setting 
and  other  defects. 

Judge  for  flavour  in  the  samples  reconstituted  as  per  directions  on 
the  can. 

5.3  Number  of  Samples  —  The  number  of  samples  in  a  single  session 
should  not  exceed  5.  If  the  number  of  samples  is  more,  then  the 
evaluation  should  be  done  in  different  sessions  with  interval  of  3  to 
4  hours. 

5.4  Coding  —  Coding  of  the  samples  should  be  done  as  recommended 
under  7.7  of  IS  :  6273  (  Part  I  )-1971f. 

6.  PROCEDURE  FOR  EVALUATIONS 

6.1  Technique  of  Evaluation  —  Observe  the  appearance  of  the 
container  before  opening  the  can.  Place  the  can  on  the  table  for 
examination  in  the  same  upright  position  in  which  it  stood  before 
examination  so  that  it  would  enable  the  panelist  to  open  the  top  and 
examine  the  contents  at  the  surface  and  subsequently  at  the  bottom.  Pour 
out  the  can  contents  into  a  beaker  while  observing  its  consistency  and 
later  sediment  at  the  bottom  if  any.  Finally  take  a  spoonful  of  the 
product  into  the  mouth  to  examine  it  for  its  body  and  texture.  Judge  for 
flavour  in  the  samples  reconstituted  as  per  directions  on  the  label. 


♦Specification  for  condensed  milk  {first  revision  ). 

fGuide  for  sensory  evaluation  of  foods  :  Part  I  Optimum  requirements. 


IS  :  10029  -  1981 

6.2  Method  —  Follow  the  composite  scoring  method  as  given  in  4,2.8  of 
IS:  6273  (Part  II)-1971*. 

6.3  Evaluation  Card  —  Use  the  evaluation  card  given  in  Table  1  for 
recording  observations.  Indicate  the  sample  score  in  the  column  provided 
for  it  after  deducting  the  total  defective  score  for  each  attribute. 


TABLE  1     EVALUATION  CARD  FOR  SWEETENED  CONDENSED  MILK 

(  Clauses  6.3  and  6.4 ) 

Name     Date 

Code  No Time 


Maximum 

MrXIMUM  FOR 

Sample 

Score 

Each 

Attribute 

Score 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

5 

3 

15 

9 

35 

21 

45 

27 

A)   Score  the  sample  for  different  characteristics.     Indicate  the  degree  of  defects,  if  any, 
encircling  the  applicable  one  and  deduct  accordingly  from  the  characteristic  score. 

Characteristic 


(1) 
i)  Package  appearance 
ii)  Colour  and  appearance 
iii)  Body  and  texture 
iv)  Flavour 

Note  —  If  the  sample  scores  less  than  the 
is  to  be  rejected. 

B)  Degree  o{  defects 
Characteristic 


(1) 
i)  Package  appearance 

ii)  Colour  and  appearance 
iii)   Body  and  texture 

iv)  Flavour 


Defect 


minimum  for  any  characteristic,  it 


Degree  of  Defect 


t —    -\  t  ■  ■■-■ 
Suspicion 

Definite 

Pronounced 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

Improper    seal/ 
rust  spot/soiled/ 
dull  surface 

1 

2 

3 

Browning 

1 

2 

3 

Mould     buttons 

2 

5 

10 

Fat      separation 

1 

3 

5 

Thickened 

2 

10 

16 

Sandy/coarse/ 
mealy  heavy 

2 

5 

10 

Settled 

1 

2 

3 

Caramelized 

1 

2 

5 

Rancid/tallowy 

2 

4 

8 

Metallic 

2 

5 

10 

Fruitiness 

2 

5 

10 

"Guide  for  sensory  evaluation  of  foods:  Part  II  Methods  and  evaluation  cards. 

7 


IS  :  10029  -  1981 

6.4  Grading  —  After  computation  of  data,  recorded  in  Table  1  by  the 
panelists,  the  following  grades  should  be  awarded. 

Score  Grades 

90  and  above  Excellent 

80  —  89  Good 

60  —  79  Fair 

59  and  below  Poor 

6.5  Statistical  Evaluation  of  Results 

6.5.1  For  the  purpose  of  statistical  evaluation  one  of  the  methods 
mentioned  under  4.2.8.4  of  IS  :  6273  (  Part  II )-  1971*  should  be 
adopted. 


•Guide  for  sensory  evaluation  of  foods  :  Part  II  Methods  and  evaluation  cards. 

8 


