**************** 


*  tOT£ 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live" 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


IS  101-5-2  (1988)  :  Methods  of  sampling  and  test  for  paints, 
varnishes  and  related  products,  Part  5:  Mechanical  test  on 
paint  films,  Section  2:  Flexibility  and  adhesion  [CHD  20: 
Paints,  Varnishes  and  Related  Products] 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


5fR  TT^  ^TT  <sMHI  |  *ft  ^fft  ^TRT  ^ff  ^TT  ^T^fT  )f 

Bhartrhari — Nltisatakam 
"Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


BLANK  PAGE 


<*i  *3f», 


*?W!& 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


UDceera^^m :  62om-4     (Third  Reprint  AUGUST  2004)   IS  :  101  (  Part  5/SeCR2j  J988 


llJll 


Indian  Standard  reaffirmed 

METHODS  OF  SAMPLING  AND  TEST  NuvZ|04 

FOR  PAINTS,  VARNISHES  AND  RELATED  PRODUCTS 

PART  5    MECHANICAL  TESTS 
Section  2    Flexibility  and  Adhesion 

(  Third  Revision  ) 


1.  Scope  —  Prescribes  the  following  four  tests  for  determination  of  flexibility  and  adhesion: 

a)  Bend  test, 

b)  Scratch  hardness  test, 

c)  Cupping  test,  and 

d)  Pull  off  test. 

2.  Bend  Test 

2.1  Outline  of  the  Method  —  This  is  an  empirical  test  for  assessing  the  resistance  of  a  coating  of 
paint,  varnish,  etc,  to  cracking  and/or  detachment  from  a  metal  substrate  when  subjected  to 
bending  round  a  cylindrical  mandrel. 

2.2  Apparatus 

2.2.1  Material  —  In  both  types  of  apparatus  described  below,  the  mandrels  shall  be  made  of  a 
rigid  and  suitably  corrosion  resistant  material,  such  as  stainless  steel. 

2.2.2  Type  1  apparatus  —  A  suitable  apparatus  is  shown  in  Fig.  1  and  2  and  is  used  with  test 
panels  of  thickness  not  greater  than  03  mm.  A  set  of  hinges  is  provided,  each  incorporating  a 
cylindrical  mandrel;  the  diameters  of  the  mandrels  are  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  8,  10,  12,  16,  20,  25  and  32  mm, 
respectively.  The  dimensions  of  the  apparatus  are  not  critical  except  that  the  gap  between  the  sur- 
face of  the  mandrel  and  the  plates  of  the  hinge  should  be  055  ±  005  mm.  The  mandrel  should  be 
free  to  rotate  on  its  pin  and  the  apparatus  shall  be  provided  with  a  stop  to  ensure  that  when  the 
test  panel  is  bent,  the  two  portions  are  parallel. 

Note  —  Especially  with   the  2  mm  diameter   ma.idrel,   it  is   important   to  ensure  that  no  distortion  of  the  mandrol 
takes  place  during  the  bending  process,  and  that  any  mandrel  showing  such  distortion  is  not  used. 

STOP    OF   SIMILAR 
HEI6HT    OF    MANDREL  - 


MANDREL 


FIG.  1    TYPE  1  BEND  TEST  APPARATUS 


Adopted  30  March  1988 


©  July  1989,  BIS 


6r6 


BUREAU    OF    INDIAN     STANDARDS 

MANAK   BHAVAN.    9  BAHADUR   SHAH   ZAFAR  MARG 

NEW  DELHI  110002 


IS  :  101  (  Part  5  Sec  2  )  -  1988 


FIG.  2    TYPE  1  BEND  TEST  APPARATUS  IN  USE 

2.2.3  Type  2  apparatus  —  A  suitable  apparatus  is  shown  in  Fig.  3  and  4  and  is  normally  used 
with  test  panels  of  thickness  up  to  10  mm.  With  soft  metals,  such  as,  aluminium,  thicker  panels 
may  be  used  provided  there  is  no  distoition  of  the  mandrel.  The  apparatus  incorporates  one  of  a 
series  of  cylindrical  mandrels  of  diameters  6,  10  and  13  mm. 

Note  —  By  agreement  between  the  parties,  other  diameters  of  mandrel  may  be  used  with  the  Type  2  apparatus. 

2.2.4  Controlled  temperature  chamber  —  This  is  required  for  tests  which  are  specified  to  be 
carried  out  at  temperatures  other  than  27  +  2"C.  It  consists  of  an  oven  or  refrigerator  in  which  the 
temperature  of  the  worki  ng  chamber  can  be  controlled  to  within  ±  1°C  of  the  required  test  tempe- 
rature, and  which  is  fitted  with  the  following  ancillary  equipment: 

a)  A  circulation  fan  in  the  working  chamber; 

b)  A  suitable  remote-control    device  by  which   the  panel  can  be  bent  without  opening  the  test 
chamber;  and 

c)  A  temperature  indicating  or  recording  device  located  with    its  bulb,  or  sensitive  element,  in 
close  proximity  to  the  coating  under  test. 

2.3  Test  Panels  —  They  shall  be  of  burnished  steel,  burnished  tinplate  or  soft  aluminium.  The 
panels  shall  be  flat  and  free  from  distortion  and  the  surface  shall  be  free  from  any  visible  ridges  or 
cracks. 

PANEL     HOLDER 


BEMDIN6    PIECE 


HANDLE 


Base  plate 


WEDGE 
CLAMP     PLATE 


FIG.  3    TYPE  2  BEND  TEST  APPARATUS 

2 


AMENDMENT  NO.  i    JANUARY  1998 

TO 

IS  101(PART  5/SEC  2)  :  1988    METHODS  OF  SAMPLING 

AND  TEST  FOR  PAINTS,  VARNISHES  AND  RELATED 

PRODUCTS 

PART  S    MECHANICAL  TESTS 

Section  2    Flexibility  and  Adhesion 

(  Third  Revision  ) 

(  Page  1,  clause  122,  line  3  )  —  Substitute  one  of  the  diameters  of  the 
mandrels  '6.25  mm'  for  '6  mm*. 

(  Page  2,  clause  223,  line  4  )  —  Substitute  one  of  the  diameters  of  the 
mandrels  '6.25  mm'  for  '6  mm'. 

(  Page  5,  clause  323  )  —  Substitute  the  following  for  the  existing  clause: 

'32 3  Needle  —  The  scratching  needle  has  a  hard  hemispherical  tip  of  1  mm  of 
diameter.  The  hemispherical  tip  shall  be  firmly  attached  and  the  exposed  part 
shall  be  free  from  any  contaminants. 

NOTE  —  Details  about  the  tip  and  the  aeedle  are  given  in  Annex  A  for  guidance.' 

(  Page  5,  clause  33)  —  Substitute  the  following  for  the  existing  clause: 

'33  Test  Panels  —  Unless  agreed  for,  the  panels  shall  be  of  tin  plate,  burnishing 
steel  or  hard  aluminium  prepared  by  acid  chroma  ting.' 

(  Page  12,  clause  542  )  —  Insert  the  following  Annex  at  the  end: 

ANNEX  A 
(Clause  3.23) 

PROCEDURE  FOUND  TO  BE  CONVENIENT  FOR  MANUFACTURE 
AND  RE-TIPPING  OF  SCRATCH  TEST  NEEDLES 

A-l  Manufacture  of  New  Needles 

A-l.l  For  a  batch  of  shanks  in  the  vertical  position  with  the  dimpled  end 
uppermost  by  inserting  them  in  a  tray  made  from  perforated  sheet  metal. 


AncMl  No.  1  to  IS  101  ( Pwt  ^Sm  2  ) :  19M 

A-1J  Place  a  very  small  quantity  of  a  suitable  solder  paste  on  the  end  of  each 
shank,  and  then  put  a  steel  ball  in  position,  relying  on  the  solder  paste  to  bold  the 
ball  in  position  at  this  stage. 

NOTE — The  amomt  of  tolder  pane  to  be  aaad  ia  judged  by  experience,  inrafficieat  will  not 
mete  ■  fun  aoldered  joint  tad  loo  rone*  will  lead  to  note  or  lest  complete  envelopment  of 
netted  ball. 

A-l  J  Place  the  tray  of  shanks  in  an  oven  or  muffle  furnace  adjusted  to  a 
temperature  of  210°C  to  220°C  for  about  5  min  to  melt  the  solder  and  thus 
secure  the  ball  in  the  dimple  at  the  end  of  the  shank. 

A-l  A  Remove  the  needles  from  the  source  ot  neat,  allow  to  coot,  and  wipe 
each  ball  to  remove  flux  residues. 

A-U  Check  that  the  ball  is  securely  fixed  and  that  there  is  no  solder  on  the 
part  of  the  ball  which  will  be  used  to  make  the  scratch. 

A-Z    Re-tipping  or  Needles 

A-2.1  Fix  the  needles  in  a  tray  made  from  perforated  sheet  metal  as  described 
in  A-l  .1  above. 

A-2J  Place  the  tray  of  needles  in  an  oven  or  muffle  furnace  adjusted  to  a 
temperature  of  210°C  to  220°C  and,  as  soon  as  the  solder  has  softened,  remove 
the  tray  and  brush  the  end  of  tbe  needles  with  a  clean  brush  in  older  to  dislodge 
the  steel  balls. 

A-2  J    When  the  shanks  have  cooled,  proceed  as  described  in  A-1.2  to  A-1.5. 

A-3    Guidance  on  Tip  Material 

The  following  tips  are  in  common  use: 

a)  Steel  Balls  Depending  on  the  circumstances,  this  type  of 

tip  may  show  signs  of  early  wear.  In  view  of 
the  ease  wirk  which  needles  with  steel  balls 
can  be  made,  it  is  recommended  that  they  be 
used  once  only  and  then  re-tipped. 

b)  Tungsten  Carbide  Tips         These  tips  last  much  longer  than  steel  tips 

and  can  be  obtained  commercially. 


Amend  No.  1  to  IS  101  (  Part  5/Sec  2  )  :  1988 

c)  Ruby  Tips  These  (ceramic)  tips  last  a  very  long  time. 

The  tips  have  to  be  attached  to  the  shank  by 
glueing  rather  than  by  soldering  and  can  be 
obtained  commercially. 

In  all  cases,  it  is  important  that  a  suitable  steel  shank  is  used  which  will  hold  the 
tip  securely  in  the  correct  position.  An  example  of  a  suitable  shank  is  given  in 
Fig.  6  of  Ibis  standard. 


(CHD020) 


Printed  ai  Dee  Kay  Printers.  New  Delhi-110015.  India 
3 


AMENDMENT  NO.  2    MARCH  1999 

TO 

IS  101  (  PART  5/SEC  2 )  :  1988    METHODS  OF 

SAMPLING  AND  TEST  FOR  PAINTS,  VARNISHES  AND 

RELATED  PRODUCTS 

PART  5    MECHANICAL  TESTS 

Section  2    Flexibility  and  Adhesion 

(  Third  Revision  ) 

(  Page  3,  clause  2.3.3,  lines  2  and  3  )  —  Substitute  the  following  for  the 
existing: 

'IS  101  (  Pari  3/Sec  2 ) :  1989  Methods  of  sampling  and  test  for  paints,  varnishes 
and  related  products  :  Part  3  Tests  on  paint  film  formation,  Section  2  Film 
thickness  ( third  revision  )'. 

(  Page  7,  clause  3.43  )  —  Insert  the  following  sentence  at  the  end  of  clause: 

'Unless  otherwise  specified  in  the  product  specification,  it  shall  be  deemed  to 
have  met  this  requirement  if  it  passes  under  a  load  of  1  000  g.' 


( CHD  20 ) 


Primal  ;il  Da.'  K;in    l'i inters.  New  Delhi 


AMENDMENT  NO.  3      MAY  2006 

TO 

IS  101  (  PART  5/SEC  2  )  :  1988     METHODS  OF 

SAMPLING  AND  TEST  FOR  PAINTS,  VARNISHES  AND 

RELATED  PRODUCTS 

PART  5     MECHANICAL  TESTS 

Section  2  Flexibility  and  Adhesion 

(  Third  Revision  ) 

( Page  1,  clause  1 )  —  Substitute  the  following  for  the  existing  clause: 

1  Scope  —  Prescribes  the  following  five  tests  for  determination  of  flexibility 
and  adhesion: 

a)  Bend  test, 

b)  Scratch  hardness  test, 

c)  Cupping  test, 

d)  Pull  off  test,  and 

e)  Cross  cut  adhesion  test.' 

(  Page   12,  clause  5.6.2,  read  with  Amendment  No.    1  )  —  Add  the 
following  at  the  end: 

'6  CROSS  CUT  ADHESION  TEST 

6.1  Outline  of  the  Method  —  This  method  is  applicable  for  the  assessment  of 
the  adhesion  of  the  coating  films  to  metallic  substrates  by  applying  and 
removing  the  25  mm  semi-transparent  pressure  sensitive  tape  over  cuts  made  in 
the  film. 

6.2  Test  Methods  ■—  There  are  essentially  two  test  methods  for  the  determination  of 
adhesion. 

6.2.1  Test  Method  1  —  It  is  generally  used  for  job  at  site  and  if  the  dry  film 
thickness  is  125  microns  or  more. 

6.2.2  Test  Method  2  —  It  is  generally  used  for  job  in  the  laboratory  and  if  the 
dry  film  thickness  is  less  than  125  microns. 

6.2.3  These  methods  do  not  distinguish  between  higher  levels  of  adhesion. 
These  methods  are  not  applicable  in  multicoated  system  where  failure  may 
occur  between  coats. 

1 


Amend  No.  3  to  IS  101  (  Part  5/Sec  2  ) :  1988 

6.3  Test  Method  1 

6.3.1  Apparatus 

6.3.1.1  Cutting  toot  —  Sharp  razor  blade,  scalpel,  knife  or  other  cutting  edges 
are  in  good  condition. 

6.3.1.2  Cutting  guide  steel  or  other  hard  metal  straightedge  to  ensure  cuts. 

6.3.1.3  Tape  —  25  mm  wide  semi-transparent  pressure  sensitive  tape  (see 
IS  13262  :  1992  Pressure  sensitive  adhesive  tapes  with  plastic  base). 

6.3.1.4  Eraser  —  attached  at  the  end  of  the  pencil. 

6.3.1.5  Illumination  —  A  light  source  to  determine  whether  the  cuts  have  been 
made  through  the  film  to  the  substrate. 

6.3.1.6  Test  specimen  —  In  the  field  the  specimen  is  the  coated  structure  or 
article  on  which  the  adhesion  is  to  be  evaluated.  In  the  laboratory,  apply  the 
materials  to  mild  steel  panels  or  panel  of  the  composition  and  surface  conditions 
on  which  it  is  desired  to  determine  adhesion. 

6.3.2  Procedure  —  Select  a  clean  and  dry  area  of  film  free  from  blemishes  and 
minor  surface  imperfection.  Two  cuts  arc  made  in  the  film  about  40-mm  long 
that  intersect  near  their  middle  with  a  smaller  angle  of  30°  to  45°.  When  making 
the  incisions,  use  the  straightedge  and  cut  through  the  coating  to  the  substrate  in 
one  steady  motion.  Inspect  the  incisions  for  reflection  of  light  from  the  metal 
substrate  to  establish  that  the  coating  film  has  been  penetrated.  If  the  substrate 
has  not  been  reached  make  another  cuts  in  different  location.  Do  not  attempt  to 
deepen  the  previous  cut  as  this  may  affect  adhesion  along  the  incision.  Remove 
two  complete  laps  of  the  pressure-sensitive  tape  from  the  roll.  An  additional 
length  of  75  mm  is  removed  at  a  steady  rate.  Place  the  centre  of  the  tape  at  the 
intersection  of  the  cuts  with  the  tape  running  in  the  same  direction  as  the  smaller 
angles.  Smooth  the  tape  into  place  by  finger  in  the  area  of  the  incisions  and  then 
rub  firmly  with  the  eraser  on  the  end  of  the  pencil.  The  colour  under  the 
transparent  tape  is  useful  indication  of  when  good  contact  has  been  made. 
Within  90  ±  30  seconds  of  application,  remove  the  tape  by  seizing  the  free  end 
by  pulling  it  off  rapidly  back  upon  itself  as  close  to  an  angle  of  180°  as  possible. 
Inspect  the  cut  area  for  removal  of  coating  from  the  substrate  or  previous 
coating.  The  coated  panel  is  considered  to  satisfy  the  test  if  no  peeling  or 
removal  of  the  film  is  observed. 


Amend  No.  3  to  101  (Part  5/Scc  2) :  1988 

6.4  Test  Method  2 

6.4.1  Apparatus 

6.4.1.1  Cutting  tool  —  Sharp  razor  blade,  scalpel,  knife  or  other  cutting  device 
having  a  cutting  edge  angle  between  1 5  and  30  degrees  that  will  make  either  a 
single  cut  or  several  cuts  at  once. 

6.4.1.2  Cutting  guide  —  Steel  or  other  hard  metal  straightedge  to  ensure  cuts. 

6.4.1.3  Tape  —  25  mm  wide  semi-transparent  pressure  sensitive  tape  (see  IS  13262  : 
1992). 

6.4.1.4  Eraser  —  attached  at  the  end  of  the  pencil. 

6.4.1.5  Illumination  —  A  light  source  to  determine  whether  the  cuts  have  been 
made  through  the  film  to  the  substrate. 

6.4. 1.6  Magnifying  glass 

6.4.1.7  Test  specimen  —  In  the  field  the  specimen  is  the  coated  structure  or 
article  on  which  the  adhesion  is  to  be  evaluated.  In  the  laboratory,  apply  the 
materials  to  mild  steel  panels  or  panel  of  the  composition  and  surface  conditions 
on  which  it  is  desired  to  determine  adhesion. 

6.4.2  Procedure  —  Select  a  clean  and  dry  area  of  film  free  from  blemishes  and 
minor  surface  imperfection.  Place  the  panel  on  a  firm  base  and  under  the 
illuminated  magnifier  make  parallel  cuts.  For  coalings  having  a  drying  film 
thickness  up  to  and  including  50  micron  space  the  cuts  1  mm  apart  and  make 
eleven  cuts.  For  coatings  having  a  drying  film  thickness  between  50  micron  and 
125  micron  space  the  cuts  2  mm  apart  and  make  six  cuts.  For  film  thickness 
greater  Uian  125  microns  tliis  method  is  not  applicable.  Make  all  cuts  about  20 
mm  long.  Cut  through  the  film  to  the  substrate  in  one  steady  motion  using  just 
sufficient  pressure"  on  the  cutting  tool  to  have  the  cutting  edge  reach  the 
substrate.  After  making  the  required  cuts  brush  the  film  slightly  with  a  soft 
brush  to  remove  any  detached  flakes  or  ribbon  of  coatings.  An  additional 
number  of  cuts  at  90°  centered  on  the  original  cuts  arc  made.  Brush  the  area  as 
before  and  inspect  the  incision  for  reflection  of  light  from  the  substrate.  If  the 
metal  lias  not  been  reached  make  another  grid  in  a  different  location.  Remove 
two  complete  laps  of  the  pressure-sensitive  tape  from  the  roll.  An  additional 
length  of  75  mm  is  removed  at  a  steady  rate.  Place  the  centre  of  the  tape  over 
grid.  Smooth  the  tape  into  place  by  finger  in  the  area  of  the  incisions  and  then 


Amend  No.  3  to  101  (Part  5/Sec  2) :  1988 

rub  firmly  with  the  eraser  on  the  end  of  the  pencil.  The  colour  under  the 
transparent  tape  is  useful  indication  of  when  good  contact  has  been  made 

Within  90  ±  30  seconds  of  application,  remove  the  tape  by  seizing  the  free  end 
by  pulling  it  off  rapidly  back  upon  itself  as  close  to  an  angle  of  180°  as  possible. 
Inspect  the  grid  area  for  removal  of  the  coating  from  the  substrate  or  from  a 
previous  coating  using  the  illuminated  magnifier.  The  edges  of  the  cuts  should 
be  smooth  and  none  of  the  square  of  the  lattice  should  be  detached.  The  coated 
panel  is  considered  to  satisfy  the  test  if  no  peeling  or  removal  of  the  film  is 
observed. 


( CHD  20 ) 


Reprography  Unit,  BIS,  New  Delhi,  India 


IS  :  101  (  Part  5/Sec  2  )  -  1988 


PANEL  HOLDER 


BASE  PLATE 


BENDING 
PIECE 


FIG.  4     DETAILS  OF  TYPE  2  BEND  TEST  APPARATUS 


2.3.1  Dimensions  —  The  test  panels  shall  be  rectangular  and  approximately  100  mm  x  50  mm  in 
size  and  either  03  mm  ( for  use  with  Type  1  apparatus  )  or  10  mm  (  for  use  with  Type  2  appa- 
ratus )  thick,  unless  otherwise  specified.  The  test  panels  may  be  cut  to  size  after  coating  and  drying 
provided  no  distortion  occurs.  In  case  of  aluminium  panels,  the  longer  side  shall  be  parallel  to  the 
direction  of  metallurgical  rolling. 

2.3.2  Preparation  and  coating  of  panels  —  The  test  panels  shall  be  prepared  in  accordance  with 
IS  :  101  (  Part  1/Sec  3  )-1986  'Methods  of  test  for  paints,  varnishes  and  related  products:  Part  1 
Test  on  liquid  paints  (  general  and  physical),  Section  3  Preparation  of  panels  ( third  revision  )', 
unless  otherwise  specified,  and  shall  then  be  coated  by  the  specified  method  with  the  product  under 
test.  If  the  product  under  test  is  applied  by  brushing,  the  direction  of  laying  off  marks  shall  be  para- 
llel to  the  longer  side  of  the  panel. 

2.3.3  Thickness  of  coating  —  The  thickness  in  inn  of  the  dry  coating  shall  be  determined  by  the 
method  specified,  using  one  of  the  procedures  described  in  IS  :  101  (  Part  3/Sec  6  )  'Methods  of 
test  for  paints,  varnishes  and  related  products:  Part  3  Tests  on  paint  film  formation,  Section  6 
Film  thickness  (  third  revision)' . 

2.4  Procedure 

2.4.1  Drying  the  test  panel  —  The  coated  test  panels  shall  be  dried  (  or  stoved  and  aged  )  for  the 
specified  time  and,  unless  otherwise  specified,  shall  be  conditioned  at  27  ±  2CC  and  65  ±  5 
percent  relative  humidity  for  a  minimum  of  16  h.  The  appropriate  test  procedure  shall  then  be 
carried  out  as  soon  as  possible. 


IS  :  101  (  Part  5/Sec  2  )  -  1988 

2.4.2  Ambient  conditions  —  The  test  shall  be  carried  out  at  27  ±  2°C  and  65  ±  5  percent 
relative  humidity,  unless  otherwise  specified. 

2.4.3  Handling  the  test  panel  —  Warming  the  test  panel  by  undue  handling  shall  be  avoided. 

2.4.4  Procedure  for  a  single  specified  size  of  mandrel  —  The  appropriate  procedure  given  in  2.4.5, 
2.4.6,  or  2.4.7  shall  be  carried  out  on  two  separate  test  panels  and  the  panels  shall  then  be 
examined  as  described  in  2.4.8  (  if  the  results  differ,  additional  tests  shall  be  made  ). 

2.4.5  Test  with  Type  1  apparatus  at  27  ±  2°C  —  Fully  open  the  apparatus,  fitted  with  the  appro- 
priate mandrel,  and  insert  the  panel  so  thaf  it  may  subsequently  be  bent  with  the  coated  side 
outwards. 

Close  the  apparatus  evenly  without  jerking,   over  a   period  of  1  to  2  s,  thus  bending  the  panel 
over  the  mandrel  through  180J. 

2.4.6  Tests  with  Type  2  apparatus  at  27  ±  2°C  —  Firmly  secure  the  apparatus  near  the  edge  of  a 
bench  so  that  the  handle  can  be  operated  freely.  Lower  the  panel  holder  by  withdrawing  the  wedge 
and  use  the  adjusting  screw  to  move  the  bending  piece  away  from  the  mandrel  position.  Fit  the 
apparatus  with  the  appropriate  mandrel.  Lower  the  handle  into  a  vertical  position  and  then  insert 
the  panel,  painted  side  down,  between  the  mandrel  and  the  bending  piece  until  approximately  40  mm 
of  the  panel  protrudes  when  measured  from  the  mandrel  centre  line  towards  the  bending  piece. 
Clamp  the  panel  firmly  to  the  panel  holder  using  the  lock  nuts  and  plate.  Raise  the  panel  holder  by 
inserting  the  wedge  into  its  groove  until  the  panel  just  touches  the  mandrel.  Using  the  adjusting 
screw,  raise  the  bending  piece  until  it  just  touches  the  panel.  Lift  the  handle  evenly  through  180° 
without  jerking  over  a  period  of  1  to  2  s,  thus  bending  the  panel  over  the  mandrel  through  180°C. 

After   bending,    release  the    panel    by   moving  the   bending    piece  away  from   the    mandrel, 
lowering  the  panel  holder  by  removing  the  wedge  and  unscrewing  the  lock  nuts. 

Note  —  A  piece  of  thin  paper  may  be  inserted  over  the  coated  surface  between  the  panel  holder  and    the  bending 
piece  to  prevent  the  coating  being  scratched  during  the  bending  operation. 

2.4.7  Tests  at  temperatures  other  than  27  ±  2°C  —  Open  the  apparatus  fitted  with  the  appropriate 
mandrel  and  place  the  panel  in  position  so  that  it  may  subsequently  be  bent  with  the  coated  side 
outwards.  Place  the  apparatus  containing  the  panel  in  the  test  chamber  previously  adjusted  to  the 
specified  temperature.  After  2  h,  with  the  panel  still  in  the  chamber  at  the  specified  temperature, 
close  the  apparatus  evenly  and  without  jerking  by  means  of  the  remote-control  device,  over  a  period 
of  1  to  2  s.  It  is  essential  that  the  door  of  the  chamber  shall  remain  closed  from  the  time  of 
insertion  of  the  apparatus  until  after  the  bending  operation. 

2.4.8  Examination  of  the  test  panel  —  Examine  the  test  panel  coating  immediately  after  bending, 
and  in  the  case  of  Type  1  apparatus,  without  removing  the  panel  from  the  apparatus.  Use  normal 
corrected  vision  or,  by  agreement,  a  lens  of  10  x  magnification,  and  examine  the  coating  for 
cracking  and/or  detachment  from  the  substrate,  ignoring  the  surface  of  the  coating  less  than  10  mm 
from  the  edge  of  the  panel. 

Note  —  If  a   lens   is   used,   it   is  essential   to  mention   this   fact   in   the  test   report   and   to  avoid  misleading 
comparisons  with  results  obtained  using  normal  vision  only. 

2.5  Procedure  for  Determination  of  Diameter  of  the  First  Mandrel  to  Cause  Failure  —  Carry  out  the 
appropriate  procedure  given  in  2.4.5,  2.4.6  and  2.4.7  on  successive  test  panels,  examining  each 
panel  as  described  in  2.4.8  and  using  mandrels  of  successively  smaller  diameter  until  the  coating 
cracks  and/or  becomes  detached  from  the  substrate.  Record  the  diameter  of  the  first  mandrel  at 
which  the  coating  cracks  and/or  becomes  detached,  after  confirming  the  result  by  repeating  the 
procedure  with  this  size  of  mandrel  on  a  fresh  panel.  In  the  event  of  failure  not  occurring  with  the 
mandrel  of  smallest  diameter,  record  this  fact. 

3.  Scratch  Hardness 

3.1  Outline  of  the  Method  —  This  is  a  test  method  for  determining  the  resistance  of  a  paint  film  to 
penetration  by  scratching  with  a  needle. 

3.1.1  The  test  may  be  used  as  a  GO/NO-GO  test  by  appyling  a  single  specified  load  to  the  needle. 
It  may  also  be  used  by  applying  increasing  loads  to  the  needle  to  determine  the  maximum  load  at 
which  the  coating  is  pulled/penentrated  to  the  substrate. 

3.2  Apparatus 

3.2.1  Mechanized  apparatus  —  Figure  5  illustrates  the  principle  of  the  apparatus.  Figure  6  shows 
a  suitable  type  of  apparatus  but  other  arrangements  can  be  used  which  give  a  similar  performance. 
This  apparatus  consists   essentially   of  a   horizontal  sliding  panel  (A)  driven  by  a  constant-speed 


IS  :  101  (  Part  5/Sec  2  )  -  1988 


motor  (fl)  at  a  rate  of  3  to  4cm/s  beneath  the  point  of  a  scratching  needle  (C)  which  is  perpendi- 
cular to  the  film.  The  needle  is  fixed  in  a  chuck,  directly  above  which  is  a  holder  for  weights  which 
shall  be  able  to  take  weights  up  to  at  least  2  000  g  (  see  Note  ).  The  apparatus  is  adjusted  so  that 
the  needle  comes  smoothly  into  contact  with  the  film,  that  is,  before  the  stop  (D)  reaches  the  bottom 
of  the  sloping  ramp  (£).  The  scratch  shal  I  be  straight  and  not  less  than  60  mm  in  length.  A  ramp 
with  an  angle  of  10  to  15"  to  the  horizontal  has  been  found  to  be  satisfactory.  An  electrical  indicat- 
ing device  based  on  conductivity  may  be  used  as  a  guide  to  penetration  of  the  film,  where 
appropriate. 

Note  —  The  maximum  load  for  which  the  apparatus  is  designed  shall  be  marked  on  the  apparatus. 

3.2.2  Hand  operated  apparatus  —  A  hand  operated  apparatus  may  be  used  except  for  referee 
tests,  provided  it  is  operated  so  as  to  give  a  similar  performance  to  the  mechanized  apparatus 
specified  in  3.2.1,  that  is,  regular  movement,  smooth  lowering  of  the  needle,  etc. 

A  schematic  diagram  of  the  apparatus  is  as  shown  in  Fig.  7. 

Note  —  Smooth    lowering   may   conveniently   be  accomplished   by  lowering  the   needle  onto  a  safety  razor  blade 
and  then  allowing  it  to  slide  off  the  sharp  edge  of  the  blade  onto  the  film. 

3.2.3  Needle  —  The  scratching  needle  has  a  hardened  steel  hemispherical  tip  of  1  mm  diameter, 
and  may  conveniently  be  made  by  soldering  a  1  mm  diameter  steel  ball  of  the  type  used  in  ball 
bearings  (  1  percent  C,  1  percent  Cr  type  steel  )  to  a  steel  shank  of  the  type  illustrated  in  Fig.  7. 

3.3  Test  Panels  —  The  panels  shall  be  burnished  steel  plate,  tinplate,  or  acid  chromate  treated 
hard  aluminium. 

3.3.1  Dimensions  —  The  test  panels  shall  be  rectangular  and  approximately  125  mm  x  50  mm  in 
size.  If  the  product  under  test  is  to  be  applied  by  brushing,  the  material  used  shall  be  of  such  a  size 
that,  after  coating  drying,  a  panel  of  the  above  dimensions  can  be  cut  from  it  with  the  brush 
marks  parallel  to  the  shorter  side. 

3.3.2  Preparation  and  coating  of  panels  —  The  test  panels  shall  be  prepared  in  accordance  with 
IS  :  101  (  Part  1/Sec  3  )-1986,  unless  otherwise  specified,  and  shall  then  be  coated  by  the  specified 
method  with  the  product  or  system  under  test. 

3.4  Procedure 

3.4.1  Drying  the  test  panels  —  The  coated  test  panels  shall  be  dried  (  or  stoved  and  aged  )  for  the 
specified  time,  and  unless  otherwise  specified,  shall  be  conditioned  at  a  temperature  of  27  ±  2"C 
and  relative  humidity  of  65  ±  5  percent  for  a  minimum  time  of  16  h.  The  appropriate  test  procedure 
shall  then  be  carried  out  as  soon  as  possible. 


STOP  (D) 

NEEDLE(C 
SLIDING    PANEL(A) 
SL0PIN6    RAMP(EJ 

CONSTANT  SPEED     ' 
MOTOR   (  B  ) 


FIG.  5    SUITABLE  TYPE  OF  MECHANIZED  SCRATCH  TEST  APPARATUS 

5 


IS  :  101  (  Part  5/Sec  2  )  -  1988 


£k 


EXTREMITY    TO  FIT 
IN    CHUCK 


IS 


7-5 


Ll-25-! 


DEPRESSION    TO 
RECEIVE  STEEL   BALL 


All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 
FIG.  6    SUITABLE  SHANK  FOR  SCRATCH  TEST  NEEDLE 


FIG.  7    DIAGRAM  OF  SCRATCH  TEST  APPARATUS 

6 


IS  :  101  (  Part  5/Sec  2  )  -  1988 

3.4.2  Single  specified  load 

3.4.2.1  Take  an  unused  needle  and  examine  it  under  30  x magnification  to  ensure  that  the 
hardened  steel  point  is  smooth,  hemispherical  and  free  from  contamination. 

3.4.2.2  Fix  the  needle  in  the  chuck  so  that  the  position  of  operation  is  perpendicular  to  the 
coating. 

3.4.2.3  Clamp  the  test  panel,  with  the  coating  uppermost,  to  the  sliding  panel  of  the  apparatus 
with  the  longer  side  of  the  panel  parallel  to  the  direction  in  which  the  scratch  will  be  made. 

3.4.2.4  Place  weights  on  the  holder  above  the  needle  to  obtain  the  specified  load. 

3.4.2.5  Start  the  motor  of  the  apparatus  or  pull  the  sliding  panel  of  the  hand-operated  appara- 
tus and  allow  the  scratch  to  be  made  on  the  coating. 

3.4.2.6  Remove  the  panel  and  examine  the  scratch  to  see  if  the  coating  has  been  penetrated 
to  the  substrate.  By  agreement  between  the  interested  parties,  a  suitable  magnification  may  be 
used,  in  which  case  the  degree  of  magnification  shall  be  mentioned  in  the  test  report. 

3.4.3  Minimum  load  to  cause  failure  —  Carry  out  the  procedure  given  in  3.4.2,  using  a  fresh 
portion  of  a  test  panel  for  each  scratch,  starting  at  a  load  somewhat  less  than  that  expected  to 
cause  penetration  of  the  coating  and  continuing  by  successively  increasing  the  load  by  suitable 
increments  (for  example  50  g  ),  until  the  coating  is  penetrated  to  the  substrate.  Record  the 
minimum  load  at  which  the  needle  penetrates  the  coating  after  confirming  the  result  by  repeating 
the  procedure  with  this  load  both  on  the  original  test  panel  and  on  a  fresh  one. 

4.  Cupping  Test 

4.1  Outline  of  the  Method  —  This  is  a  test  for  assessing  the  paint  film  to  cracking  and/or  detech- 
ment  from  a  metal  substrate  when  subjected  to  gradual  deformation  by  indentation  under  specified 
conditions.  The  method  may  be  either  used  as  a  GO/NO-GO  test  by  testing  to  a  specified  depth  of 
indentation  to  assess  compliance  with  a  particular  requirement  or  by  gradually  increasing  the  depth 
of  indentation  to  determine  the  minimum  depth  at  which  the  film  cracks  and/or  becomes  detached 
from  the  substrate. 

4.2  Apparatus 

4.2.1  Cupping  apparatus  —  As  shown  in  Fig.  8. 

4.2.1.1  Die  —  This  is  surface  hardened  and  the  surface  in  contact  with  the  test  panel  is  plane 
polished. 

4.2.1.2  Retaining  ring  —  The  surface  in  contact  with  the  test  panel  is  plane  polished  and 
parallel  to  the  contacting  surface  of  the  die. 

4.2.1.3  Indentor  —  The  part  contacting  the  test  panel  is  of  hardened  polished  steel  and  forms 
a  hemisphere  of  20  mm  diameter.  During  the  test,  the  indentor  shall  be  prevented  from  turning  and 
the  centre  of  the  spherical  portion  shall  not  deviate  from  the  axis  of  the  die  by  more  than  01  mm. 

4.2.1.4  Measuring  device  —  This  measures  the  depth  of  the  indentation  made  by  the  indentor 
to  the  nearest  005  mm. 

4.3  Panels 

4.3.1  Dimensions  —  The  test  panel  shall  be  rectangular  with  the  following  dimensions: 

a)  Thickness  —  Not  less  than  0  3  mm  and  not  more  than  1  25  mm  (  as  specified  and  measured 
with  a  micrometer  to  the  nearest  001  mm  ). 

b)  Width  and  length  —  At  least  70  mm   (  upper  limit  depending  on  the  capacity  of  the  appa- 
ratus ). 

The  test  panel  may  be  cut  to  size  after  coating  and  drying  provided  no  distortion  occurs. 

4.3.2  Coating  of  test  panel  —  Coat  the  panel  with  material  under  test  by  the  appropriate  method 
and  dry  or  stove  in  specified  manner  for  the  specified  period.  If  normal  drying  conditions  are 
specified,  these  shall  be  interpreted  as  a  temperature  of  27  ±  2°C  and  a  relative  humidity  of  65  ±  5 
percent  with  free  circulation  of  air  and  not  exposed  to  direct  sunlight. 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  the  test  panel  shall  be  conditioned  at  27  +  2°C  and  65  ±  5 
percent  relative  humidity  for  16  h  immediately  prior  to  carrying  out  the  test. 


IS  :  101  (  Part  5/Sec  2  )  -  1988 


INDENTOR 
AND  BLAL 

RETAINING 
RING 


33-01-1 


m — * 


TEST  STRIP- 


27'00i-05 


55-0!-1 


OEPTH  OF 
INDENTATION 

All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 

FIG.  8    CUPPING  TEST  APPARATUS 


4.4  Procedure 

4.4.1  Procedure  for  a  single  specified  depth  of  indentation  —  The  following  procedure  shall  be 
carried  out  on  two  separate  test  panels  (  if  the  results  differ,  further  tests  shall  be  made  ). 

4\.4.1.1  Hold  the  test  panel  firmly  between  the  retaining  ring  and  the  die  with  the  coating 
towards  the  die.  and  with  the  spherical  end  of  the  indentor  in  contact  with  the  test  panel  (  zero 
position  of  the  indentor ).  Adjust  the  panel  until  the  central  axis  of  the  indentor  intersects  the 
panel  at  at  least  35  mm  from  each  edge. 

4.4.1.2  Having  measured  the  temperature  and  the  humidity,  advance  the  spherical  end  of  the 
indentor  into  the  test  piece  at  a  rate  of  02  ±  01  mm/s  (  12  ±  6  mm/min  )  until  the  specified  depth 
is  reached,  that  is  until  this  distance  has  been  travelled  by  the  indentor  from  the  zero  position. 

4.4.1.3  Using  normal  corrected  vision  or,  by  agreement,  a  lens  of  10 x  magnification,  examine 
the  coating  of  the  test  panel  for  cracking  and/or  detachment  from  the  substrate. 

Note  1     -  If  a  Ions  is  used,  it  is  essential  to  mention  this  fact  in  the  test  report  and  to  avoid  misleading  compari- 
sons with  the  results  obtained  using  normal  corrected  vision  only. 

Note  2  —  If  the  substrate  shows  any  signs  of  cracking,  the  test  should  be  considered  as  invalid. 

4.4.2  Procedure  for  determination  of  minimum  depth  of  indentation  to  cause  failure  —  Carry  out 
the  procedure  given  in  4.4.1  but  advance  the  indentor  until,  using  normal  corrected  vision  (  or,  by 
agreement,  a  lens  of  10  x  magnification  for  observation  ),  a  crack  first  appears  on  the  surface  of 
the  coating  and/or  the  coating  begins  to  become  detached  from  the  substrate. 

Stop  the  indentor  at  this  point  and  measure  the  depth  of  indentation  (  see  Fig.  8  )  to  the 
nearest  01  mm  as  the'distance  travelled  by  the  indentor  from  the  zero  position.  Confirm  the  result 
by  repeating  the  determination  on  a  fresh  panel  ( if  the  results  differ,  further  determinations  shall 
be  made ). 

5.  Pull  off  Test 

5.1  Outline  of  the  Method  —  This  is  a  pull  off  test  on  a  single  or  multi  coat  system  of  paint,  varnish 
or  related  products.  One  test  may  be  carried  out  using  different  substrates. 


8 


IS  :  101  (  Part  5/Sec  2  )  -  1988 

5.2  Apparatus 

5.2.1  Tensile  tester— Suitable  for  carrying  out  the  chosen  procedure  specified  in  5.5.  The  tensile 
stress  shall  be  applied  in  a  direction  perpendicular  to  the  coated  substrate  and  shall  be  increased 
at  a  substantially  uniform  rate,  not  greater  than  1  MPa/s,  such  that  the  failure  of  the  test  assembly 
occurs  within  90  s.  Suitable  designs  for  applying  the  tensile  stress  are  shown  in  Fig.  9. 


SUPPORT 


BAU 
JOINT 


TEST 
CYLINDER 


COATING 
SUBSTRATE 


TEST    PIECE 


COATING 

TEST 
CYLINDER 

BALL    AND   SOCKET 
SLIDING    JOINT 


SUPPORT  (SUITA- 
BLY   DESIGNED 
TO    ALLOW    FOR 
JOINT  ASSEMBLY) 


BALL   AND   SOCKET 
SLIDING     JOINT 


9A 


9B 
FIG.  9    SUITABLE  DESIGNS  FOR  APPARATUS  FOR  PULL  OFF  TEST 


5.2.2  Test  cylinders  —  Suitable  for  use  with  the  tensile  tester  (  5.2.1  ),  faced,  of  diameter  20  mm 
(  unless  otherwise  agreed  )  and  of  sufficient  thickness  to  ensure  freedom  from  distortion  during  the 
test.  It  is  recommended  that  the  length  of  the  test  cylinder  should  be  not  less  than  half  its  diameter. 
The  faces  shall  be  machined  perpendicular  to  the  long  axis  of  the  cylinder  before  use. 

5.2.3  Centring  device  —  For  ensuring  proper  coaxial  alignment  of  the  test  assembly  during  the 
adhesion  process  used  as  described  in  5.5.1  and  5.5.3.  A  suitable  design  is  shown  in  Fig.  10. 

5.2.4  Cutting  device  —  Such  as  a  sharp  knife,  for  cutting  through  cured  adhesive  and  the  paint 
coating  to  the  substrate,  round  the  circumference  of  the  test  cylinder. 

5.3  Materials 

5.3.1  Adhesives  —  Special  attention  is  required  in  selecting  suitable  adhesives  to  be  used  in  the 
test. 

To  produce  failure  of  the  coating,  it  is  essential  that  the  cohesive  and  bonding  properties  of 
the  adhesive  be  greater  than  those  of  the  coating  under  test. 

9 


IS  :  101  (  Part  5/Sec  2  )  -  1988 

Preliminary  screening  of  adhesives  shall  be  carried  out  in  order  to  determine  their  suitability 
for  use.  Suitable  adhesives  and,  if  applicable,  their  unmixed  components  shall  cause  little  or  no 
visible  change  in  the  coating  under  test  when  left  in  contact  with  the  coating  for  a  period  equivalent 
to  the  curing  time  of  the  adhesive. 

An  adhesive  may  be  considered  suitable  for  a  particular  coating  if  it  gives  the  same  test  result 
as  that  produced  by  using  a  different  class  or  type  of  adhesive  when  similarly  tested. 

Note  — Inmost  cases,  cyanoacrylate,  two-component  solventless  epoxide  and  peroxide-catalyzed  polyester 
adhesives  have  been  found  suitable.  Cyanoacrylate  and  polyester  adhesives  have  a  short  curing  time  and  are  pre- 
ferred for  use  with  coatings  that  have  been  subjected  to  highly  humid  conditions. 


FIG.  10    SUITABLE  DESIGN  FOR  CENTRING  DEVICE  FOR  20  mm  DIAMETER  TEST  CYLINDERS 

5.4  Test  Substrate 

5.4.1  Preparation  and  coating  of  test  substrate  —  Prepare  the  specified  test  substrate  in  accor- 
dance with  IS  :  101  (  Part  1/Sec  3  )-1986  and  then  coat  it  by  the  specified  method  with  the  product 
or  system  under  test. 

5.4.2  Drying  the  test  coating  —  Dry  (  or  stove  and  age  )  the  coated  test  substrate  for  the  speci- 
fied time  and  under  the  specified  conditions  and  condition  it  at  27  ±  2°C  and  65  ±  5  percent 
relative  humidity  for  a  minimum  of  24  h.  Then  carry  out  the  appropriate  test  procedure  as  soon 
as  possible. 

5.4.3  Thickness  of  coating  —  Determine  the  thickness,  in  micrometres,  of  the  dry  coating  by  one 
of  the  procedures  specified  in  IS  :  101  (  Part  3/Sec  6  ). 

5.5  Procedure 

5.5.1  Adhesives  —  Prepare  and  apply  the  adhesive  in  accordance  with  the  manufacturer's 
instructions.  Use  the  minimum  quantity  of  adhesive  required  to  produce  a  firm,  continuous  and 
even  bond  between  the  components  of  the  test  assembly.  Remove  any  excess  adhesive  immediately, 
if  possible. 

5.5.2  General  method  for  testing  both  rigid  and  deformable  substrates  —  Use  as  the  test  piece  an 
area,  cut  from  the  coated  substrate  (  disc  of  minimum  diameter  30  mm  or  square  of  minimum  side 
30  mm  ).  Take  care  not  to  distort  the  test  piece.  Apply  the  adhesive  evenly  to  the  surfaces  of  two 
freshly-cleaned  test  cylinders  of  equal  diameter  (  see  Notes  1  and  3  ).  Place  the  test  piece  between 
the  adhesive-coated  faces  of  the  test  cylinders  such  that  the  test  cylinders  are  coaxially  aligned  in 
the  centre  of  the  piece,  as  shown  in  Fig.  11.  Align  the  test  assembly  in  the  centring  device  and  main- 
tain the  alignment  for  a  period  equal  to  the  curing  time  of  the  adhesive  (  see  Note  2  ).  At  the  end 
of  this  period,  carefully  use  the  cutting  device  to  cut  around  the  circumference  of  the  test  cylinders 
through  to  the  substrate. 

Not*  1  —  The  adhesion  at  the  adhesive  coating  interface  may  be  improved  by  lightly  abrading  the  surface  of  the 
dried  coating  before  the  application  of  adhesive-coated  face  of  the  test  cylinder. 


10 


IS  :  101  (  Part  5  Sec  2  )  -  1988 

Note  2  -  In   special   tests    under  highly  humid   conditions,  the  curing  time  of  the  adhesive  shall  be  as  short  as 
possible. 

Note  3  —  In  the  method  for  deformable   substrates,   if  a  poor  adhesive    bond  is   expected  between  the  uncoated 
face  of  the  substrate  and  the  test  cylinder,  coat  both  faces  of  the  substrate  with  the  product  under  test. 


-TEST    CYLINDER  COATED 
WITH    ADHESIVE 


"^mmw^1 


-SUBSTRATE   PAINTED 


^^         'IDES 


TEST    CYLINDER    COATED 
WITH    ADHESIVE 


FIG.  11     TEST  ASSEMBLY,  SANDWICH  METHOD  (  SUBSTRATE  PAINTED  ON  ONE  OR  BOTH  SIDES  ) 

5.5.3  Method  for  testing  from  one  side  only  (  suitable  for  rigid  substrates  only  )  —  Apply  the 
adhesive  evenly  to  the  uncoated,  freshly-cleaned  surface  of  a  test  cylinder.  Place  the  adhesive- 
coated  face  of  the  test  cylinder  in  contact  with  the  coating  (  see  Note  1  under  5.5.2  ),  for  a  period 
equal  to  the  curing  time  of  the  adhesive  (see  Note  2  under  5.5.2  ).  At  the  end  of  this  period,  carefully 
use  the  cutting  device  (  5.2.4 )  to  cut  around  the  circumference  of  the  test  cylinder  through  to  the 
substrate. 

Place  the  outer  ring  in  position  and  test  as  indicated  in  Fig.  12. 

•OUTER   RING 


L,    I    J 


/ 


IW^WAVIVJ? 


-TEST    CYLINDER 
COATED   WITH  ADHESIVE 


/-PAINT 
S      COATING 


■COATED 
SUBSTRATE 


FIG.  12    TEST  ASSEMBLY  FOR  RIGID  SUBSTRATES 


5.5.4  Method  using  test  cylinders  —  Apply  the  adhesive  evenly  to  the  uncoated,  freshly-cleaned 
surface  of  a  test  cylinder.  Place  the  adhesive-coated  surface  of  the  test  cylinder  in  contact  with 
the  surface  of  the  cylinder  coated  with  the  product  under  test,  as  shown  in  Fig.  13,  and  align  the 
test  assembly  in  the  centring  device  for  a  period  equal  to  the  curing  time  ot  the  adhesive. 


-PAINTED    TEST 

CYLINDER 
-PAINT     FILM 

.-ADHESIVE 


TEST    CYLINDER 
COATED    WITH    ADHESIVE 


FIG 


TEST  ASSEMBLY  USING  TEST  CYLINDER 


5.5.5  Measurement  —  Immediately  after  the  period  allowed  for  curing  of  the  adhesive,  place  the 
test  assembly  in  the  tensile  tester  taking  care  to  align  the  test  cylinders  so  that  the  tensile  force  is 
applied  uniformly  across  the  test  area,  without  the  bending  moment.  Apply  a  tensile  stress,  in- 
creasing at  a  rate  not  greater  than  1  MPa/s,  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  coated  substrate  such 
that  the  failure  of  the  test  assembly  shall  occur  within  90  s  of  intial  application  of  the  stress. 


11 


IS  :  101  (  Part  5/Sec  2  )  -  1988 

Record  the  tensile  stress   to   break  the  test    assembly  and  examine  the  fracture  surfaces  in 
accordance  with  5.6.2.  r 

5.5.6  Number  of  determinations  —  Carry  out  at  least  three  determinations.  For  reteree  purposes, 
carry  out  a  minimum  of  five  determinations.   Report  the  results  of  all  determinations. 

5.6  Results 

5.6.1  Breaking  strength  —  The    breaking    strength,    in    megapascals,   for  each  test   assembly    is 
given  by  the  formula: 

_Af_ 
d* 
where 

F  -=  the  breaking  force,  in  newtons;  and 

d  —  the  diameter,  in  millimetres,  of  the  test  cylinder. 

In  the  case   ot  ter*  cylinders   of  diameter  20  mm,  the  breaking   strengthen   megapascals,   is 
given  by  the  formula: 

AF       =     _£_ 
400  100 

5.6.2  Nature  of  failure  —  Express  the  result  as  the  percentage  area  and  the  site  of  fracture  in  the 
system  under  test  in  terms  of  adhesive,  cohesive  or  adhesive/cohesive  failure. 

For  convenience,  the  following  scheme  may  be  used  to  describe  the  results  observed: 

A  =  cohesive  failure  of  substrate 
A\B  —  adhesive  failure  between  substrate  and  first  coat 

B  =  cohesive  failure  of  first  coat 
fi/C  =  adhesive  failure  between  first  and  second  coats 
-  jY  =  adhesive  failure  between  final  coat  and  adhesive 

Y  =  cohesive  failure  of  adhesive 
Y\Z  ■=  adhesive  failure  between  adhesive  and  test  cylinder. 

Example: 

If  a  paint  system  tested  in  the  pull  off  test  breaks  at  a  tensile  stress  of  20  MPa 
and  examination  of  the  area  on  each  side  of  the  site  of  separation  reveals  approximately  30 
percent  of  the  test  cylinder  area  associated  with  cohesive  break  of  the  first  coat  and  70  percent 
of  the  test  cylinder  area  associated  with  intercoat  adhesive  break  between  the  first  and  the 
second  coats,  the  pull  off  test  result  is  expressed  as: 

20  MPa,  30  percent  B,  70  percent  BjC 


EXPLANATORY     NOTE 

This  is  one  of  a  series  of  standards  on  methods  of  sampling  ana  test  for  paints,  varnishes  and 
related  products.  This  standard  supersedes  clauses  15  and  16  of  IS  :  101-1964  'Methods  of  test  for 
ready  mixed  paints  and  enamels  (  second  revision  )  '.  In  the  preparation  af  this  standard,  consider- 
able assistance  has  been  taken  from  ISO  :  1518-1973  'Paints  and  varnishes  — Scratch  test  prepared 
by  the  International  Organization  for  Standardization  (  ISO  ). 

12 


Printed  al  iK'e  Kay  Printers.  New  Delhi  1  HX115.  India 


