**************** 






w^z 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 10041 (1981) : Glossary of terms for airlines technical 
operation [TED 14: Aircraft and Space Vehicles] 



> y*i jifc^^y/ 1 7ua5a>N^sg=a is^gnm^g; 



2^U l»>%55^^>^!^ 



^^cvvv^w 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
'Invent a New India Using Knowledge'' 



VZS\: 



, 10- 



nvs 1 ^"?^ 



«* 



;i#* 



T ^ 



^ 



.^ 






'WM TJ^ ^TT <sMHI | ^T ^rqt ^TW\ ^f WT ^WT %' 
Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 



gi^p^g 



**************** 



BLANK PAGE 




**n±rr 




u*> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 




Indian Standard 



( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 



GLOSSARY OF TERMS FOR AIRLINE 
TECHNICAL OPERATIONS 



1. Scop* — Covers definitions for glossary of terms used for airline technical operations. 

2. Terminology 



Term 
Accessibility 

Accessory 
Accident 



Age, Threshold 



Definition 

A design feature which affects the ease of admission to an area 
for the performance of visual and manipulative maintenance. 

A part, subassembiy or assembiy designed for use in conjunction 
with or to supplement another assembly or unit. 

An occurrence associated with the operation of an aircraft, which 
takes place between the time any person boards the aircraft with 
the intention of flight, until such time as all such persons have 
disembarked, in which: 

a) Any person suffers death or serious injury as a result of 
being in the aircraft, or by direct contact with the aircraft 
or anything attached thereto; or 

b) the aircraft receives substantial damage; or 

c) any damage is caused to the property of a third party. 

The time before which inspection of the condition of an item is 
required, or beyond which inspection is considered to provide 
information on the condition of the item about its usefulness. 

Not* — Threshold age may be specified as an upper limit before which 
Inspection must be performed, or may be specified as a lower limit below 
which an inspection is not considered to provide useful information. 



Airborne Integrated Data 
System (AIDS) 

Aircraft in Service 



Aircraft on Ground 
(AOG) 



Aircraft Utilization 

( utilization } 



Alternate ( Alternative 
Item, Alternative 
Procedure, Alternate ) 



Automatic in-flight recording and/or monitoring of specified 
parameters. 

The average number of aircraft used in aircraft operations and 
normal maintenance during a reporting period. 

Note — Tne number of aircraft in service is calculated from the aircraft 
days available for the period divided by the total number of days in the 
period. Aircraft days available include days required for normal main- 
tenance and overhaul. 

The highest priority designation to process a requirement for a 
spare part(s) and/or maintenance action. It also indicates that an 
aircraft is unable to continue or be returned to revenue service 
until the appropriate action is taken. 

The average daily flying hours for one in-service aircraft ( of a 

y i vwn iiect /. 

Note — it is computed by dividing the total flying hours (airborne) 
accumulated by the fleet in a reporting period by the number of in-service 
aircraft days in the same period. Utilization may also be expressed In 
flying hours per year. 

An item which fully meets the required functional and structural 
specifications but differs either in overall external dimensions, 
connections, installations and/or mounting provisions and requires 
additional parts, rework, or modification to be installed in a 
specific application. Alternate procedures fully meet the required 
maintenance specifications, but may require additional documenta- 
tion, training, manning, special tooling and/or test equipment. 



Adopted 19 November 1981 



© February 1983, ISI 



Gr8 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 10041 -1981 

Term 

Alternative 
Analysis. Criticality 



Analysis, Failure Mode 
and Effect 



Analysis, Maintenance 
(Study, Work) 



Analysis, Performance 



Analysis, Reliability 



Arrival, Late ( Technical ) 



Definition 



See ALTERNATE. 



Assembly 



Assembly, Next Higher 

Burden, Maintenance 

Burn-in 

Calibration 

Cancel 

Cancellation (Technical) 

Card, Job 

Card, Work 
Cause, Basic 



An extension of failure mode and effect analysis, wherein the 
degree of degradation of aircraft operating safety due to failure 
effects is predicted. 

A systematic evaluation of a system or subsystem design, analyzed 
down to the component and/or function level, to identify the 
possible modes of failure and determine their effect on the system 
or aircraft. 

The process of identifying required maintenance functions through 
analysis of a fixed or assumed design and determining the most 
effective means of accomplishing these functions. 

The assessment of the performance level of an item, aircraft or 
fleet from performance data, or measurements or statistical infor- 
mation. 

The assessment of probabilities of satisfactory performance of an 
item under specified conditions of use over a given service period 
by means of statistical studies. 

An aircraft arrival after scheduled arrival time, caused by a known 
or suspected equipment malfunction and/or defect. 

A number of parts, sub-assemblies, or any combination thereof 
joined together to perform a specific function, which can be disasse- 
mbled without impairing the designed use. 

Note — The distinction between an assembly and a sub-assembly is not 
always exact— an assembly in one instance may be a sub-assembly in 
another where it torms a portion of an assembly. 

An assembly to which the particular item under discussion is 
attached or is a part of — either directly or through intermediate 
attaching parts. 

See Cost, Indirect Maintenance ( IMC ) 

See RUN-IN 

The application of a specifically known and accurately measured 
input to ensure that an item will produce a specifically known 
output which can be accurately measured or indicated. Calibration 
includes adjustment or recording of corrections, as appropriate. 

Determined to be no longer usable in a particular former application. 
(See "DELETE" if the item is unnecessary and can be omitted 
without the need for future reference ). 

Elimination of a scheduled trip because of a known or suspected 
malfunction and/or defect. 

Note — Cancellation of any or all of the flight legs pf a multi-leg trip 
constitutes only one cancellation. 

A card issued to the workman giving details of the work to be done. 
Usually contains provision for recording start and completion times 
and the estimated target or standard hours. 

See, Card, Job. 

The cause of a defect, failure or damage which results in malfunc- 
tioning of an item when: 

a) Being operated in a manner for which it was designed, 
and 

b) the cause was not externally induced. 



IS: 10041 -1981 



Term 
Check 

Check, Bench 



Check, Functional 
( Test, Functional ) 

Complaint 
( Snag ) 



Complaints, Maintenance 
Complaints, Pilot 

Component 
Concept, Maintenance 

Condition Monitoring 

Cost, Direct Maintenance 
(DMC) 



Cost, Indirect Maintenance 
(IMC) 
Burden Maintenance 



Cycle, Aircraft Operating 
Cycle, Flight (Landing) 



Cycle, Engine Operating 

Cycle, Flight ( Landing ) 
Cycle, Supersonic 



Damage, Foreign Object 
(FOD) 

Damage, Ingestion 

( Damage. Foreign Object) 
(FOD) 



Definition 

An examination to determine the functional capability or physical 
integrity of an item. 

A functional check of an item in the shop to determine whether or 
not the item may be returned to service, or whether it requires 
adjustment, repair or overhaul. 

A detail test of an item to determine if it operates within prescribed 
limits of movement, flow, temperature, pressure, etc. 

A known or suspected malfunction or defect found by flight crew 
or maintenance personnel which is documented and requires 
maintenance action. 

Reports of discrepancies which are found by maintenance person- 
nel and which require maintenance action. 

Suspected or known malfunctions or unsatisfactory conditions 
entered by the flight crew into the aircraft log and which require 
maintenance action. 

Any self-contained part, combination of parts, sub-assemblies or 
units, which perform a distinctive function necessary to the opera- 
tion of a system. 

Generalized maintenance management ideas and general mainte- 
nance principles which are studied and then developed into a 
specific plan for application through a particular maintenance 
programme. 

See Maintenance, Condition Monitored 

Those maintenance labour and material costs directly expended in 
maintaining an item or an aircraft. 

Note — This does not Include those indirect maintenance labour and 
material expenditures which contribute to the overall maintenance opera- 
tions, line station servicing, administration, record keeping, supervision, 
tooling, test equipment, facilities, etc. 

Those maintenance labour and material costs not considered to 
be direct maintenance costs, but which contribute to the overall 
maintenance programme costs through overhead operations, admi- 
nistration, record keeping, supervision, tooling, test equipment, 
facilities, etc. 

A completed take-off and landing sequence. 

Note — Touch-and-go landings are counted as Aircraft Operating 
Cycles. 

A completed engine thermal cycle including the application of 
take-off power. 

See Cycle, Aircraft Operating. 

A completed supersonic flight sequence comprising acceleration 
through Mach 1 and deceleration to subsonic flight. 

Note — One aircraft operating cycle can include more than one super- 
sonic cycle. 

Damage to any portion of the airplane caused by impact or inges- 
tion of birds, stones, hail or other debris. 

Internal damage to an engine caused by an outside object such as 
birds, stones, or other foreign objects. 



15:10041-1981 

Term 
Debugging 

Defect 

Deferability 

Delay (Technical) 



Delete 
Departure 



Derating 



Diversion ( Technical ) 



Downtime 



Downtime, Active 
Maintenance 

Downtime, Maintenance 



Downtime, Non-Active 
Maintenance 

Effectiveness, System 



Effectiveness, Unscheduled 
Maintenance 



Definition 

A process to detect and remedy Inadequacies preferably prior to 
operational use. 

Any confirmed abnormal condition of an item, whether or not this 
could eventually result in a failure. 

The possiblity that an item can remain inoperable and/or defective 
within the terms of the Minimum Equipment List (MEL) or Con- 
figuration Deviation List (CDL). 

Technical delays occur when the malfunctioning of an item, the 
checking of the same or necessary corrective action causing the 
final departure to be delayed by more than a specified lime after 
the programmed departure time in any of the following instances; 

i) an originating flight departs later than the scheduled 
departure time. 

ii) a through service or turn -around flight remains on the 
ground longer than the allowable ground time. 

iii) the aircraft is released late from maintenance- 
Note— A cancellation supersedes a delay (that is, a flight which is 
cancelled after having been delayed is considered to be a cancellation only 
— not a delay and a cancellation ). 

Removal of an item from a specific application. For technical data, 
" Delete " indicates the removal of a paragraph, phrase, page, etc. 

Movement of an aircraft from the blocks for the purposes of 
an intended flight. 

Note 1 — There can be only one departure per flight (that is, only the 
final departure is counted as in cases where the aircraft returns to the 
block after initially departing . 

Note 2 — For convenience, some operators consider a departure to 
occur each time an aircraft leaves the ground for a flight. 

The intentional reduction of the stress/strength ratio in the appli- 
cation of an item, usually for the purpose of reducing the occur- 
rence of stress-related failures. 

The landing of an aircraft at an airport other than the airport of 
origin or destination, as a result of malfunction or suspected 
malfunction of any item on the aircraft. 

The time during which an aircraft is not available for flight for 
technical reasons. 

The maintenance downtime during which work is being done on an 
item or an aircraft. 

The interval between the time an item or aircraft is made available 
for preventive or corrective maintenance until the item or aircraft 
is returned to or considered available for service use. 

The maintenance downtime during which no work is being done on 
the item or aircraft. 

The probability that a system can successfully meet an operational 
demand within a given time when operated under specified 
conditions. 

The percentage of the total number of unscheduled maintenance 
actions which were successful. 



IS: 10041 -1981 



Term 
Effecti vity 

Engine 

Engine, Basic 

Engine, Maximum Neutral 



Cnninaopinn Human 



Equipment, Airborne 
Support (ASE) 

Equipment, Aircraft 
Ground (AGE) 

Equipment, Automatic Test 



Equipment, Ground Support 
(GSE) 

[Equipment, Aircraft 
Ground (AGE)] 

Equipment, Support 



Error, Build 
(Error, Production) 



Error, Maintenance 



Error, Production 
Evaluation, Service 

Evaluation, Structural 
(Airframe) 



Definition 

Indicates the applicability of items, materials and/or technical data 
to a type, series, model or individual item. 

The basic engine assembly plus its essential accessories as 
supplied by the engine manufacturer. 

Those units and components which are used to induce and convert 
fuel air mixture into power; to transmit power to the propeller shaft, 
if any, and accessory drives; to supplement the function of other 
defined systems external to the engine; and to control and direct 
the flow of internal lubrication. 

An engine plus those parts making it peculiar to an aircraft type, 
but not to any particular position on the aircraft. 

The determination of man's capabilities and limitations as they 
relate to the equipment or systems he will use, and the application 
of this knowledge to the planning, design, and testing of man- 
machine combinations to obtain optimum performance, operability, 
reliability, efficiency, safety, and maintainability. 

All equipment required on the aircraft to support the operation and 
maintenance of the aircraft and all its airborne equipment. 

See Equipment, Ground Support (GSE). 



Equipment which automatically carries out a predetermined 
programme of testing for possible malfunction with minimum 
reliance on human intervention. 

Equipment required on the ground to support the operation and 
maintenance of the aircraft and all its airborne equipment. 



Equipment required to support the operation and maintenance of 
the aircraft and all its airborne equipment. 

Those faulty functions which occur and are not rectified during 
the assembly and/or subsequent test of an item during manufacture, 
overhaul or repair. 

An error on the part of maintenance personnel in operation 
maintenance on an item which results in subsequent failure or 

IIIUUUHWllVlli VI HII ^/JIWI III |>/UWIiUlieu IIIUDil&IIUII^I/ pivvcuuico 

which results in subsequent failure or malfunction. 

See ERROR , BUILD. 

An evaluation of an item while performing its intended function 
during normal operation of the aircraft. 

The assessment of any data which relates to the structural integrity 
of the airframe. 

Note — Examples of data that may be considered are listed below: 



i) Removal reports, 

ii) Failure mode reports, 
Hi) Inspection write-ups, 
iv) Flight hours, 

v) Pilot reports, 

vi) Aircraft operating cycles, and 
vii) Time. 



IS : 10041 - 1981 



Term 
Expendable 

Extra Section ( XSEC ) 

Factor, Accelerated Test 

Factor, Acceleration 
( Factor, Accelerated Test ) 

Factor, Derating 
Factors, Human 



Factor, Operating 
( In-Service Equipment ) 

Failure 

Failure, Basic 

Failure, Dependent 
Failure, Independent 

Failure, Primary 

( Failure, Independent ) 

Failure, Random 

Failure, Secondary 
( Failure, Dependent ) 

Failure, Subsidiary 

Failure Mode 
Flame-Out 

Flight 

Flight, Charter 

Flight, Ferry 

Flight, Ferry (Technical) 

Flight, Leg 



Flight, Nonrevenue 
Flight, Pilot Training 
Flight, Revenue 



Definition 

Items for which no authorized repair procedure exists and whose 
cost of repair would normally exceed that of replacement. 

Any flight made to accommodate passengers or cargo not handled 
by the regular flight schedule. 

See Factor, Acceleration. 

The ratio between the times necessary to obtain a stated proportion 
of failures for two different sets of stress conditions involving the 
same failure modes and/or mechanisms. 

The ratio of operating to design stress. 

Human physiological, physical and psychological characteristics 
relative to complex systems and the development and application 
of principles and procedures for accomplishing optimum man- 
machine integration and utilization. The term is used in a 
broad sense to cover all biomedical and psycho-social considera- 
tions pertaining to a man in the system. 

The ratio of the operating hours of the in-service equipment under 
consideration to the number of flying hours incurred by the equip- 
ment. 

The inability of an item to perform within a previously specified 
limits. 

A defect, failure or damage as a result of malfunctioning of a 
system, unit or part while being used in the manner for which it 
was designed and which was not externally induced* 

See Failure, Secondary. 
See Failure, Primary. 

Failure of an item which occurs without being caused by the failure 
of an associated item(s). 

Failure of an item which is unpredictable with respect to time. 

Failure of an item which is caused by the failure of an associated 
item(s). 

A failure found after removal, which is not related to the reason 
for removal. 

The way in which the failure of an item occurs. 

The interruption of engine operation, resulting from total loss of 
combustion while the fuel control is in the "On" position. 

A flight occurs each time an aircraft operating cycle is completed. 
( See cycle, aircraft operating ). 

A revenue flight that is not listed in the published timetable, but is 
booked for a specific purpose. 

A non-revenue flight made to position an aircraft for any reason. 

A non-revenue flight made to position an aircraft because it 
requires maintenance action. 

All passages, block to block, from one airport to the nexi airport 
of landing. 

Note — In the case of test or training flights, the terminating airport 
could be the same as the airport of origin. 

A flight not intended to generate revenue. 

Any flight made to train or check out the flight crew. 

A flight intended to generate either passenger or freight revenue 
(or both). 



IS : 10041-1981 



Term 
Flight, Scheduled 
Flight Test 
Hours, APU 



Hours, Block [ Hours, Flying 
(Block) Time] 



Hours, Flying (Airborne ) 
( Time, Flight ) 

Hours, Flying ( Block ) 
Hours, Out of Service 



Hours, Unit Flying 



Incident, Technical 
Index, Maintainability 
Inspection, Sample 



Definition 

A flight which is listed in the published time-table. 
Any flight made to check an aircraft or any part of it. 

The auxiliary power unit operating time from start-up to shut- 
down. 

The number of hours spent by an airplane from the moment it first 
moves for a flight until it comes to rest at its intended blocks at the 
next point of landing, or returns to its departure point prior to 
take-off. 

Note — Push-out from the gate is considered as part of block hours. 
The accumulated time intervals between wheels-off and wheels-on. 

See Hours, Block. 

The number of elapsed hours that an aircraft is not available for 
operation when scheduled to be available. 

Note — The out-of-service hours start when an aircraft Is first declared 
to be unavailable tor a flight, and end when available for service. 

The accumulated flying hours of alt like units installed in aircraft 
during £ specified reporting period. 

Not* — Unitflying hours are the product of total flying hours (airborne) 
of the aircraft in which units are installed and the number of units installed 
in each aircraft. 

Any event of a technical nature which may be considered to 
significantly affect the potential airworthiness of an aircraft. 

A quantitative figure of merit which relates the maintainability of 
an item to a standard reference. 

The monitoring and/or withdrawal of selected devices from service 
to permit determination of therr condition at predetermined prog- 
ressive intervals. 



Interchangeable An interchangeable part, sub-assembly, assembly or unit which 

(interchangeable Two-Way) meets or exceeds required functional and structural specifications 

for a given application. It has the same mounting provisions. 
Overall dimensions and connections may vary, provided that 
installation does not require rework or modification. 



Interchangeable, One-Way 



Introduces a new item and places restriction on the use of the old 
item. The new item may be used in place of either the old or the 
new, but the old item can only be used in an application where it 
has previously been installed. The new item is considered to 
supersede the old. 



Interchangeable, Two-Way See Interchangeable. 



Interruption, Air (Technical) 
( Station, Return to Turn 
Back, AIR ) 

Interruption, Ground 
(Technical) 
( Turnback, Ground ) 



A change from original flight plan due to a known or suspected 
malfunction and/or defect during flight. 



A ground interruption occurs when an aircraft leaves the block and 
returns for a technical reason before becoming airborne, or when 
after landing experiences a technical problem prior to reaching the 
block. 



IS : 10041 - 1981 

Term 
Interval, Confidence 

Item 

Item, Alternative 
Item, Bulk Material 



Item, Disassembly 
Threshold 

Item, Insurance 



Item, Line Maintenance 

Item, Maintenance 
Significant (MSI) 

Item, Structurally 
Significant ( SSI ) 

Landing, Touch-and-go 

Level, Confidence 

Life 

Life, Achieved Overhaul 

Life, Declared 
Life, Limited 

Life, Maximum Permitted 
( Life, Limited; 
Life, Declared; 
Life, Ultimate ) 

Life, Service 

Life, Shelf 

Life, Storage 
( Life, Shelf ) 

Life, Ultimate 

Life, Useful (Period, 
Constant Failure Rate) 

Limits, Confidence 

Line Replaceable Unit 
(LRU) 



Definition 

The range between the upper and lower values of the confidence 
limits. 

Any level of hardware assembly ( that is, part, sub-system, system, 
accessory, component, unit, material, etc ). 

See Alternate. 

A material used in random quantity such as liquid, paste, cloth, 
plastics, or of comparable composition. For example, oil, chemi- 
cals, paints, cleaners, solvents, abrasives, metals, fabrics, etc. 

Items having a specified threshold age. ( see Age, threshold ) 

An item held by either the manufacturer or an airline purely as a 
precaution in order to preclude undue scheduling problems and/or 
economic hardship which might otherwise occur should the part be 
x>ut of stock when a requirement occurs. 

Any item which can be readily changed on an aircraft during line 
maintenance operations. 

Maintenance items that are judged to be relatively the most impor- 
tant from a safety, reliability or economic stand-point. 

Local areas of primary structure which are judged by the manu- 
facturer to be relatively the most important from fatigue, corrosion 
vulnerability, or failure effects viewpoints. 

A landing in which an aircraft touches the runway and does not 
come to a full stop prior to commencing an additional flight. 

The probability that a given statement is correct. 

A period of time which is related to the usability of an item. 

The life achieved by an item before an overhaul becomes 
necessary. 

See Life, Maximum Permitted. 

See Life, Maximum Permitted. 

The time specified by an appropriate authority after which a parti- 
cular item must be removed from service and replaced. 



The life of an item at which it is no longer physically or economi- 
cally feasible to repair or overhaul the item to acceptable standards. 

See Life, Storage. 

The length of time an item can be stored under specified 
conditions and still meet specified requirements. 

See Life, Maximum Permitted. 

The length of time a population of items is expected to operate 
with a constant failure rate. This excludes any infant mortality and 
wearout periods. 

The values, upper and lower, between which a true value can be 
expected to fall, with a pre-established level of confidence. 

A unit which can be readily changed on an aircraft during line 
maintenance operations. 



List, Allowable Deficiency See List: Minimum Equipment. 



8 



IS : 10041 - 1J981 



Term 



Definition 



List, Configuration Deviation Those items, such as access panels, caps, fairings, etc, normally 



(CDL) 



List, Dispatch Inoperative 
Equipment 

List, Go-no-go 

List, Minimum Equipment 
(MEL) 

(List, Allowable Deficiency; 
List, Dispatch Inoperative 
Equipment; List, Go-no-go ) 

Log Entries 
(Log Report) 

Log Report 

Maintainability 



forming part of the exterior profile of the aircraft, the absence of 
which do not prevent dispatch. 

See List, Minimum Equipment. 



Maintenance 



Maintenance, Condition 
Monitored 
(Condition Monitoring) 



Maintenance, Corrective 
Maintenance, Deferred 



Maintenance, Line 
( Maintenance, Line 
Station ) 

Maintenance, Line Station 

Maintenance, Non-Routine 

Maintenance, On-Condition 
( On Condition ) 



Maintenance, Preventive 
Maintenance, Routine 



See List, Minimum Equipment. 

An approved list of items which may be inoperative for flight under 
specified conditions, 



All entries made by flight crew and maintenance personnel into the 
aircraft log. 

See Log Entries. 

The characteristic of material design and installation that deter- 
mines the requirements for maintenance expenditures, including 
time, manpower, personnel skill, test equipment, technical data 
and facilities to accomplish operation objectives in the operational 
environment of the user. Quantitatively, maintainability is expressed 
as the period of time within which the maintenance action can be 
performed with a specified probability using defined resources and 
prescribed procedures. 

Those actions required for restoring or maintaining an item in 
serviceable condition, including servicing, repair, modification, 
overhaul, inspection and determination of condition. 

A primary maintenance process under which data on the whole 
population of specified items in service are analyzed to indicate 
whether some allocation of technical resources is required. Not a 
preventive maintenance process, condition monitored maintenance 
allows failures to occur, and relies upon analysis of operating 
experience information to indicate the need for appropriate action. 

Note — Failure modes of condition monitored items do not have a direct 
adverse effect on operating safety. 

See Maintenance, Unscheduled. 

Maintenance associated with minor defects n,ot having any bearing 
on flight safety, which is deferred to a convenient time and/or 
location for accomplishment. 

Routine check, inspection and malfunction rectification performed 
en-route and at base stations during transit, turn-around or night 
stop. 

See Maintenance, Line 

See Maintenance, Unscheduled 

A primary maintenance process having repetitive inspections or 
tests to determine the condition of units, systems, or portions of 
structure with regard to continued serviceability (corrective action 
is taken when required by item condition ). 

See Maintenance, Scheduled 

See Maintenance, Scheduled 



IS -.10041-1981 



Term 

Maintenance, Scheduled 
( Maintenance, Preventive; 
Maintenance, Routine) 



Definition 

That maintenance performed at defined intervals to retain an item 
in a serviceable condition by systematic inspection, detection, 
replacement of wear out items, adjustment, calibration, cleaning, 
etc. 



Maintenance, Unscheduled That maintenance performed to restore an item to a satisfactory 
( Maintenance, Corrective; condition by providing correction of a known or suspected 
Maintenance, Non-Routine) mal-function and/or defect. 



Malfunction 

Man-Function 
Man-hours, Direct 
Man-hours, Maintenance 
Man-hours Per Flying Hour 

MCUR 



Mean Time Between Failure 
(MTBF) 

Mean Time to Maintenance 



Mean Time Between 
Removals ( MTBR ) 



Mean Time Between 
Unscheduled Removals 
(MTBUR) 

Mean Time to Failure 
(MTTF) 



Mean Time to Repair 
(MTTR) 

MTUR 



Mechanism, Failure 



The occurrence of a condition whereby the operation of an item is 
outside of specified limits. 

The function allocated to the human component of a system. 

Man-hours of work spent directly on the aircraft or removed items. 

The man-hours required to complete the maintenance task. 

A performance figure calculated by dividing the DIRECT MAN- 
HOURS expended to maintain a particular aircraft fleet during a 
given period by the flying hours (airborne) during that period. 

A special term for data transmission to cover a forecast of mean 
cycles between unscheduled removals that is provided by a supplier 
for provisioning purposes only. Presented as a forecast of the 
average interval in operating cycles between unscheduled removals 
( justified and unjustified ), this factor is expressed in terms of one 
unit per aircraft, and it, therefore, represents the operating cycles 
for the part number being provisioned. 

A performance figure calculated by dividing the total unit flying 
hours (airborne) accrued in a period by the number of unit 
failures that occurred during the same period. 

The arithmetic mean of the time intervals between maintenance 
actions. 

A performance figure calculated by dividing the total unit flying 
hours accrued in a period by the number of unit removals 
(scheduled plus unscheduled) that occurred during the same 
period. 

A performance figure calculated by dividing the total unit flying 
hours ( airborne) accured in a period by the number of unsche- 
duled unit removals that occurred during the same period. 

A performance figure calculated by dividing the summation of 
times to failure for a sample of failed items by the number of failed 
items in the sample. 

Note — This is different from MEAN TIME BETWEEN FAILURE since 
no allowance is given to experience of items which have not failed. 

A performance figure calculated by dividing the total active repair 
times accrued in a period on a number of designated items by the 
number of these items repaired in the same period. 

A special term for data transmmission to cover a forecast of mean 
time between unscheduled removals that is provided by a supplier 
for provisioning purposes only. Presented as a forecast of the 
average interval in unit flying hours between unscheduled removals 
( justified and unjustified ), this factor is expressed in terms of one 
unit per aircraft, and it, therefore, represents the part hours for the 
part number being provisioned. 

The physical, chemicai or other process which results in a failure. 



10 



IS: 10041 -19*1 



Term 
Modification, Mandatory 

Modification, Optional 

Modify 

Module 

On-Condition 
Optional 
Order, Expedite 

Order, Job 
( Order, Work ) 

Order, Work 

Overhaul 

Overhaul, Partial 



Overhaul, Record Control 

Overhaul, Time Controlled 
( Overhaul, Record 
Control ) 



Part 



Percent Life, Used 

Percent of Allowable Time 
Realized by an Item 
( Percent Life, Used ) 

Performance, Human 



Performance, Order Entry 



Performance, Supplier 
Shipping 



Definition 

A modification classified as compulsory by the local civil aviation 
authorities. 

A modification which may be incorporated at the discretion of the 
operator. 

To change or alter through rework and/or through the installation 
or removal of an item. 

A combination of assemblies, subassemblies and parts, contained 
in one package, or so arranged as to be installed in one 
maintenance action. 

See Maintenance, On-condition. 

Indicates a choice of interchangeable items. 

An order which specifies delivery in less than the supplier's quoted 
time or delayed delivery date, and is generated by a known require- 
ment by a specified date. 

A document which authorizes work to be done and contains the 
necessary instructions and information regarding cost allocation. 

See Order, Job 

The restoration of an item in accordance with the instructions 
defined in the relevant manual. 

The overhaul of a subassembly of an item with a time controlled 
overhaul to permit the item with longer life period to achieve its 
authorized OVERHAUL LIFE. 

See Overhaul, Time Controlled. 

An overhaul in accordance with a plan under which time histories 
of individual items are monitored. The monitoring system is used 
to schedule the removal of items before they exceed a specified 
time limit. 

One piece, or two or more pieces joined together which are not 
normally subject to disassembly without destruction of designed 
use. 

See Percent of Allowable Time Realized by an Item. 

The ratio of the actual time accumulated by the item since it was 
last "zero-timed" to the specified time limit-expressed as a 
percentage. 

A measure of man-functions and actions in a specified environ- 
ment. 

A measure expressed as a percentage which is in turn derived from 
the ratio of orders placed at under the supplier-quoted lead time to 
total orders placed during a given period. 

A measure of shipping performance expressed as a percentage 
which is in turn derived from the ratio of the number of orders 
shipped up to the supplier quoted lead time or the airline request 
date, whichever is greater, to total orders shipped in a given period. 
For purposes of computation, the order is considered as shipped if 
packed on dock available for shipment but held pending speciai 
airline instructions. A partial shipment is considered as a completed 
shipment when made in the month due, but delinquent if made the 
following month even though shipment against that order is 
completed that month. 



11 



18': 10041 -1991 



Term 

Period, Constant Failure 
Rate 

Period, Infant Mortality 



Period, Overhaul 

Period, Wear Out Failure 
Rate 

Pirep 

Plan, Maintenance 
( Plan, Technical) 



Plan, Technical 
Point, Servicing 

Point, Test 



Pool, Parts 

Procedure, Alternate 
Programme, Actuarial 



Programme, Block 
Maintenance 



Programme, Continuous 
Maintenance 



Definition 



See Life, Useful 



Programme, Equalized 
Maintenance 



Programme, Maintainability 



Programme, Maintenance 
(Program, Work) 



Programme, Work 



That early period, beginning at zero unit time, during which the 
failure rate of a family of items can be expected to decrease. 

See Time Between Overhauls ( TBO ). 

That period during which the failure rate of a family of the items 
can be expected to increase due to deterioration processes. 

See Complaints, Pilot. 

A document or set of documents which specify the maintenance 
required to assure the continuation of desired performance of an 
item or the safety of an aircraft. 

See Plan, Maintenance. 

An access specifically provided to permit servicing (lubrication, 
filling, draining, charging or cleaning ) of equipment in the normal 
installed position. 

A means of safe access to permit a measurement that will facilitate 
maintenance, repair, calibration, alignment, or monitoring. Test 
points may be accessible in the normally installed position or may 
require disassembly of equipment for accessibility. The former are 
called exposed test points, the latter internal test points. 

An arrangement whereby participants are entitled to withdraw items 
from the agreed stock held by any participant. 

See Alternate. 

A statistical technique which uses historical data to depict the life 
expectancy of an item with respect to age. 

A programme which divides major structural inspections and/or 
maintenance tasks into groups, or blocks, which permit convenient, 
economical and effective accomplishment. 

A type of complete maintenance programme which is expected to 
assure continuous availability of the airplane. Under this system 
the total maintenance effort is apportioned to each of the various 
and more frequent types of maintenance. 

Note — A complete overhaul at one point of time is not a part of a 
continuous maintenance plan. 

A maintenance programme whereby work packages are scheduled for 
accomplishment in such a manner that the required maintenance 
manpower will remain relatively constant. Portions of the heavier 
maintenance tasks are integrated into the lighter, or lesser, mainte- 
nance periods so that the work load fluctuations will be minimized. 

The planning, development and implementation of those organized 
set of tasks directly related to the specification, assessment/predic- 
tion and verification of an item's design characteristics which make 
it possible to meet operational objectives with a minimum expendi- 
ture of maintenance and support effort. 

A programme which defines a logical sequence of maintenance 
actions to be performed as events or pieces of a whole which, 
when performed collectively, result in achievement of the desired 
maintenance standards. 

See Programme, Maintenance. 



12 



IS: 10041-1981 



Term 

Quick Engine Change Unit 
(QEC) 

Quotation 



Rate, Failure 



Rate, Hazard 

Rate, Instantaneous Failure 
(Rate, Hazard) 

Rate, Schedule Interruption 



Rate, Scrap 
Redundancy 

Redundancy, Active 
Redundancy, Standby 

Reliability 

Reliability, Assessed 
Reliability, Dispatch 
Reliability, En-Route 

Reliability, Human 
Performance 

Reliability, Inherent 
Reliability, Predicted 

Remark, Pilot 
Removal, Access 

Removal, Bench Check 



Definition 

A maximum neutral engine plus those parts making it peculiar to a 
particular position on an aircraft. 

A supplier's offer in response to a customer's request for a speci- 
fic proposal to sell a specific item, quantity of items, or service, or 
document including price, delivery, applicableterms and conditions, 
and validity period for the quotation. 

The performance figure calculated by dividing the number of 
failures by the total unit hours or cycles accumulated during the 
same period. It is usually expressed as failures per 1 000 unit 
hours or cycles. 

Note — Failure rate is the reciprocal of mean time between failure. 

See RATE, INSTANTANEOUS FAILURE. 

The conditional probability of failure in a small time interval, given 
the item has survived to the beginning of that interval. i 

The ratio of the number of technical delays ( normally greater than 
15 minutes) plus the number of technical cancellations to the 
number of revenue departures, expressed as a rate per hundred 
departures. 

The number of items beyond the limits of economical repair, 
expressed as a quantity per unit of time. 

The existence of more than one means for accomplishing a given 
function. Each means of accomplishing the function need not 
necessarily be identical. 

That redundancy wherein all redundant items are operating 
simultaneously rather than being activated when needed- 

That redundancy wherein the alternative means of performing the 
function is inoperative until needed and is activated upon failure 
of the primary means of performing the function. 

The probability that an item will perform a required function, 
under specified conditions, without failure, for a specified period 
of time. 

The reliability of an item determined within stated confidence 
limits from tests or failure data on nominally identical items. 

The percentage of flights which depart without incurring a delay 
( technical ) or cancellation ( technical ). 

The probability of successfully completing a flight plan without 
incurring a failure that would cause deviation from the flight plan. 

The probability that man will accomplish all required human 
functions under specified conditions. 

The reliability potential in a given design configuration when used 
in accordance with the design specification. 

The reliability of an item estimated from its design considerations 
and from the reliability of its parts in the intended conditions 
of use. 

Those entries In the aircraft log made by the flight crew for 
information purposes only. 

The removal of an item for the sole purpose of allowing ease of 
approach to another component ( s ) and where, due to the manner 
of installation, it is impossible or impractical to do so otherwise. 

See REMOVAL, SHOP CHECK. 



13 



IS: 10041 -1981 



Term Definition 

Removal, Cannibaiization The removal of an item to satisfy the needs of another aircraft or 
( Removal, Parts Shortage items. 
Robbery ) 

Removal, Condition Analysis The removal of an item for the sole purpose of determining its 

serviceability state at a specified time. 



Removal, Confirmed 



Removal, Deferred Suspect 



Removal, Engineer's 
Examination 

Removal, Foreign Object 
Damage (FOD) 

Removal, Hot Section 
Inspection 

Removal, Item Problem 



Removal, Justified 



Removal, Life Limited 

Removal, Maintenance 
Convenience 



Removal, Mandatory 
Directive 

Removal, Modification 



Removal, On-Condition 

Removal, Parts Shortage 
Removal, Planned 
Removal, Pool 

Removal, Reason for 

Removal, Restricted Parts 
(Removal, Life Limited) 

Removal, Retrofit 

Removal, Scheduled 
(Removal, Time) 

Removal, Scheduled 
Maintenance 



A removal where a failure or defect is found which substantiates 
the reason for removal. 

The removal of an item wherein impending malfunction is suspect- 
ed, but actual removal has been deferred to a convenient time 
and/or location for accomplishment. 

The removal of an item at the request of engineer for investigation 
purposes. 

The removal of an item due to damage to any portion of the 
airplane caused by impact or ingestion of birds, stones, haH or 
other debris. 

The removal of an item for the purpose of inspection and restora- 
tion of hot section item(s) at a predetermined time/cycie limit. 

The removal of an item due to the inability of the item to perform 
within previously specified limits. 

A removal where a defect or failure is found, whether or not the 
defect or failure substantiates the reason for removal. 

See Removal, Restricted Parts. 

A removal brought about for any reason other than as a result of 
the items' life having approached or achieved a previously defined 
limit or as a result of a known or suspected malfunction and/or 
defect. 

The removal of an item to accomplish an action classified as 
compulsory by the appropriate civil aviation regulatory authority. 

The removal of an item for the sole purpose of embodying a modi- 
fication. 

The removal of an item required as the result of an on-condition 
inspection or test. 

See Removal, Cannibaiization. 

The removal of an item which is selectable for the time and 
place, without affecting the routine operation of the aircraft. 
The removal of an item for the purpose of returning it to a Spares 
Pool and/or other operator. 

The initially stated reasons for the removal of an item. 

The removal of an item in order to replace a life-limited part of 
that item. 

The removal of an item for the purpose of replacing it with an 
alternate item. 

A removal of an item brought about as a result of the items's life 
having approached or achieved a previously defined limit. 

The removal of an item to perform maintenance at defined intervals 
to retain an item in a serviceable condition by systematic inspection, 
detection, replacement of worn out items, adjustment, calibration, 
cleaning, etc. 



14 



IS: 10041-1981 



Term 
Removal, Section 

Removal, Service/Perfor- 
mance Evaluation 

Removal, Shop Check 
( Removal, Bench Check ) 

Removal, Time 

Removal, Trouble Shooting 

Removal, Unconfirmed 

Removal, Under 
Investigation 

Removal, Unjustified 

Removal, Unscheduled 

Removal Rate 



Repair 
Repairability 

Replace 

Reports, Pilot 
Requirement, Maintainability 

Requirements, Maintenance 
Resources, Maintenance 

Robbery 
Rotatable 



Run-in 
(Burn-in) 

Servicing 



Shutdown 



Definition 

The removal of an item in conjunction with the removal of a higher 
assembly. 

The removal of an item for the purpose of evaluation. 

The removal of an item for specific functional check of that item 
within a workshop. 

See Removal, Scheduled. 

A removal in which an item is removed and replaced by another 
item for the sole purpose of determining whether the malfunction 
persists. 

The removal of an item where no defect or failure is found which 
substantiates the reason for removal, even though another defect 
or failure may be found. 

The removal of an item brought about by symptoms of operational 
problems/performance where the cause has not been identified. 

The removal of an item where no defect or failure is found. 

The removal of an item brought about as a result of a known or 
suspected malfunction and/or defect. 

The number of removals of an item expressed in terms of a base 
period; usually per 1 000 aircraft hours, 1 000 item hours, 1 000 
engine hours, and sometimes per 100 or 1 000 departures. 

The restoration of an item to a serviceable condition. 

The potential of a failed item to be restored to a serviceable state 
in a specified time under stated conditions. 

The action whereby an item is removed and another item is in- 
stalled in its place for any reason. 

See Complaints. Pilot. 

A comprehensive statement of required maintenance characteris- 
tics, expressed in either qualitative or quantitative terms or both, 
to be satisfied by the design of an item. 

See Specification, [Maintenance. 

Facilities, ground support equipment, manpower, spares, consum- 
ables, and .funds available to maintain and support an item in its 
operational environment. 

See Removal, Cannibalization. 

An item that can be economically restored to a serviceable condi- 
tion and in the normal course of operations is repeatedly rehabili- 
tated to a fully serviceable condition over a period approximating 
the life of the flight equipment to which it is related. 

The operation of an item to stabilize its characteristics. 



The replenishment of consumables needed to keep an item or 
aircraft in operating condition. 

Cessation of engine operation for any reason other than training or 
normal operating procedures. 



15 



IS : 10041 - 1981 



Term 
Shutdown, Ground 

Shutdown, Inflight 

Snag 
Spare, Ready 

Spares Float 
Spares Range 



Specification, Maintenance 
( Requirements, 
Maintenance) 

Specification, Operations 
( Aircraft Maintenance ) 



Station, Return to 
Study, Work 
Subassembly 



Substitution, Equipment 
( Technical ) 



Subsystem 
Supersede 

Surplus 
System 



Take-off, Abandoned 

Take-off, Aborted 
( Take-off, Abandoned ) 



Definition 

An engine shutdown which occurs at any time an aircraft is not 
airborne. 

An engine shutdown which occurs at any time an aircraft is 
airborne. 

See Complaint. 

An item which has been assembled to the point that it can be 
attached to an aircraft without further build-up or assembly other 
than that necessary to fit it to its unique position. 

The quantity of individual items held ( additional to those installed 
on aircraft) for the purpose of providing replacements for those 
removed from aircraft for overhaul, repair or rectification. 

The total number of different items individually identified by part 
number or description. It excludes any reference to quantities of 
individual items. 

Definition of what tasks have to be performed, and when. 



A document approved by the appropriate airworthiness authority 
which establishes an air carrier's maintenance programme 
and includes time control programmes for airframe, systems, 
engines and components as required. This document is initiated 
by an air carrier and is official only after it has been approved by 
the appropriate airworthiness authority. It must be approved prior 
to operation of each type of airplane in scheduled service and 
separately for each air carrier. 

See Interruption, Air (Technical ) 

See Analysis, Maintenance. 

Two or more parts which form a portion of an assembly or a unit 
replaceable as a whole, but having a part or parts which are 
individually replaceable. 

The assignment of an alternative type of aircraft to replace the 
aircraft orginally assigned which had encountered a technical 
problem. 

Note — Some operators consider assignment of an alternative aircraft 
regardless of type to constitute an equipment substitution. 

A major functional part of a system which contributes to operational 
completeness of the system. 

A new item ' supersedes ' an old item when the latter will eventu- 
ally be forced out of use. I with regard to technical data 'super- 
seded' indicates the removal of all or any part of the publication 
and the issuance of a revision. 

Indicates a specified quantity of an item which is over and above 
that required to meet the forecasted stock requirements in support 
of normal operations. 

A combination of interralated items arranged to perform a specific 
function. 

See Takeoff, Aborted 

A take-off which has to be discontinued for any reason. 



16 



IS : 10041 - 1981 



Term 



Test 



Test, Accelerated 



Test, Functional 
Test Non-Destructive 

Time 

Time, Active Maintenance 

Time, Average Trip 

Time, Block 

Time, Flight 

Time, Job Standard 
(Time, Target) 

Time, Lead 



Time, Mean Maintenance 



Time, Mean Task 

Time, Operating 

Time, Preventive 
Maintenance 

Time, Target 

Time, Task Elapsed 

Time, Total 
Time, Turn Around 



Definition 

An examination of an item in order to ensure that the item meets 
the specified requirements. 

A test in which the applied stress level fs chosen to exceed that 
stated in the reference conditions in order to shorten the time 
required to observe the stress response of the item, or magnify the 
response in a given time. To be valid, an accelerated test must 
not alter the basic modes and/or mechanisms of failure or their 
relative prevalence. 

See Check Functional. 

A test which in no manner affects the function or serviceability of 
the item undergoing test. 

Any appropriate unit of life measurement such as hours, cycles, 
landings, etc. 

The time during which preventive and correctivejnaintenance work 
is actually being done on the item. 

The ratio between the number of flying hours for a given period 
and the number of departures for the same given period. 

See Hours, Block. 

See Hours, Flying ( Airborne ). 

The time allowed for a given task. 



Specifies the maximum number of calendar days needed by the 
supplier on a re-order after receipt of a purchase order to make 
shipment to the customer of a specified quantity. 

Initial provisioning lead times are normally established by indivi- 
dual General Terms Agreements. 

The statistical mean of the distribution of scheduled or unsche- 
duled (or both) maintenance times. The summation of the dura- 
tion of scheduled or unscheduled (or both) maintenance time 
during a given period divided by the total number of scheduled or 
unscheduled maintenance actions ( or both ) during the same time 
period is an estimate of Mean Scheduled Maintenance Time ( Ms), 
Mean Unscheduled Maintenance Time <Mu), [or Mean Main* 
tenance Time (M ) ] 

A representative task time, equal to the summation of all task 
times required to perform a specific task a number of different 
times divided by the number of times the task is performed. 

The time period during which the equipment is performing its 
intended function. 

That portion of maintenance time used in accomplishing a preven- 
tive maintenance. 

See Time, Job Standard. 

The calendar time from the commencement to the completion of a 
defined task. 

The operating time an item has accumulated since new. 

That time needed to repair, service or checkout an item or aircraft 
tor recommitment to operational service. 



17 



IS: 10041 -1981 



Term 

Time Between Overhauls 
(TBO) 
( Overhaul Period ) 

Time Since Check 

Time Since Installation 
(TSI) 

Time Since Last Shop Visit 

Time Since Overhaul 
(TSO) 

Ton Miles, Capacity 



Ton Miles, Production 



Trade-off 



Trip 

Trouble 
Trouble Shooting 

Turnback, Air 
Turnback, Ground 
Unit 

Unit, Line Replaceable 

Usage, Dispatch Inoperative 
Equipment List 

Usage, Minimum Equipment 
List 

(Usage, Dispatch 
Inoperative Equipment List 



Definition 

The maximum time that an item is permitted to operate between 
overhauls. 



The time accumulated since an item was last checked. 
Time accumulated since a given item was last installed. 

Time accumulated since a given item last visited a shop. 
The time accumulated since a given item was last overhauled. 

The product of the assessed capacity of an aircraft ( expressed in 
short tons of 2 000 pounds) and the number of miles flown on 
revenue flights (expressed in Great Circle statute miles) over a 
given period. The equivalent metric term is CAPACITY TONNE 
KILOMETRES. 

A figure calculated by adding CAPACITY TON MILES to the 
equivalent ton miles produced by non-revenue flying. 

The procedure of trading a degree of one attribute to gain a degree 
of another attribute, for example, a degree of reliability might be 
sacrificed to obtain a greater degree of performance under certain 
conditions, or a degree of performance might be sacrificed to obtain 
a greater capability for maintenance, or vice versa. 

The entire passage, consisting of one or more flight legs, from 
leaving the airport of origin to arrival at the airport of final desti- 
nation. 

Any actual or suspected malfunction and/or defect. 

Locating and diagnosing malfunctions or breakdowns in equipment 
by means of systematic checking or analysis. 

See Interruption, Air (Technical). 

See Interruption, Ground ( Technical ). 

A part or any combination of parts, mounted together, normally 
capable of independent operation. 

See Line Replaceable Unit 

See Usage, Minimum Equipment List. 



The number of occasions on which the Minimum Equipment List 
is used. 



Utilization 



Note — The MEL is used when an aircraft is dispatched with some item 
either inoperative or less than 100 percent operative, and such dispatch- 
is permitted by the operators' MEL 

The MEL is used more than once per departure, if such departure? 
occurs with more than one item less than one hundred percent operative. 

See Aircraft Utilization. 



18 



IS: 10041 -1981 

EXPLANATORY NOTE 

The pjrpose of the World Airlines Technical Operations Glossary is to provide common 
definitions of terms that have a special significance to the airlines Technical Operations community. 
The term "technical operations" as used in the title is intended to define a subject area comprising 
those matters coming under the purview of the airlines' maintenance and engineering functional 
organizations, including their interfaces with the manufacturer's engineering and product support 
-functional organizations. The modifier "Technical" as used in glossary of terms is intended to 
restrict the meaning of the terms to the Technical Operations subject area. 

In selecting terms to be included in the glossary, the sponsoring organizations have followed 
the convention that only those terms having a special significance in the Technical Operations 
subject area beyond commonly understood language usage would be included. Consistent with this 
convention, and to avoid unnecessary volume of the glossary, terms which have acceptable 
dictionary definitions have been specifically excluded. 

Throughout the glossary the use of the words "Time" and "Item" in the text of definitions 
shall be understood to have meaning as defined below: 

TIME Any appropriate unit of life measurement such as hours, cycles, landings, etc. 

ITEM Any level of hardware assembly (that is, part, sub-system, system, accessory, 
component, unit, material, etc.). 



19 



Printed at New India Printing Presa Khurja. India 



