**************** 


*■  fe^K 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live" 


IS  10017  (1981) :  Code  of  practice  for  construction  of  cocoa 
beans  storage  structures  [FAD  6:  Stimulant  Foods] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New' 


■K^y  / 1  juaaaws^fea  rs^^TTF^ 


2*S<  W I  *>S*V2^NK^ 


^frcvvv^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


?TR  TJ^  ^TT  teMHI  |  ^t  ^Wt  ^m\  ^f  ^TT  ^T^?TT  \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


.^^_ 


• 


BLANK  PAGE 


*rt*2V^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


"Wi-AFFIKMED  1994" 

IS  |  10017-  1981 

(  Reaffirmed  1999) 

Indian  Standard 

CODE  OF  PRACTICE  FOR  CONSTRUCTION    OF 
COCOA  BEANS  STORAGE  STRUCTURES 


UDC   624  953  :  631  243  32  i  663913' 12  :  006'  76 


©    Copyright  1932 

INDIAN     STANDARDS    INSTITUTION 

MANAK     BHAVAN,    9    BAHADUR     SHAH     7  A  FAR    MARU 

NEW  DELHI    110002 


Gr,3 


JW,  1982 


IS  :  10017  -  1981 

Indian  Standard 

CODE  OF  PRACTICE  FOR  CONSTRUCTION  OF 
COCOA  BEANS  STORAGE  STRUCTURES 

Stimulant  Foods  Sectional  Committee,  AFDC  39 

Chairman  Representing 

Shri  C.  P.  Natarajan  Central    Food    Technological    Research    Institute 

(  GSIR ),  Mysore 

Members 

Shri  D.  S.  Chadha  Central  Committee  for  Food  Standards   (  Ministry 

of  Health   and   Family  Welfare),   New   Delhi 

Smt  D.  Mukherjee  (  Alternate ) 
Dr  N.  K.  Jain  Tea  Research  Association,  Calcutta 

Shri  P.  C.  Sharma  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  S.  Kasturi  Government  Analyst   Laboratory,   Madras 

Dr  S.  L.  Khosla  Public  Analyst,  Government  of  Haryana,  Chandigarh 

Shri  S.  K.  Anand  (  Alternate ) 
Col  R.  K.  Kochhar  Quartermaster     General's    Branch,     Army    Head- 

quarters, New  Delhi 

Lt-Col  P.  J.  Cherian  ( Alternate ) 
Shri  S.  S.  Meenakshisundram  Coffee  Board,  Bangalore 

Smt  Sunalini  N.  Menon  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  K.  K.  Mitra  Tea  Board,  Calcutta 

Shri  Narendra  Kumar  Calcutta    Tea    Traders    Association,    Calcutta 

Shri  K,  M.  Patel  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  M.  N.  Nayar  Central  Plantation  Crop  Research  Institute  ( ICAR ), 

Kasaragod 

Shri  T.  A.  Sriram  ( Alternate ) 
Shri  C.  Y.  Pal  Cadbury  India  Limited,  Bombay 

Shri  S.  J.  Kekobad  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  K.  Ramakrishna  Pillai  The  Kerala  State  Co-operative  Marketing  Federation 

Limited,  Cochin 

Shri  P.  P.  Bhaskaran  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  C.  K.  Ramanath  Brooke  Bond  India  Ltd,  Calcutta 

Shri  A.  K.  Gupta  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  V.  H.  Shah  Kaira  District  Co-operative  Milk  Producers'  Union 

Ltd,  Anand 

Shri  Kailash  Vyas  (  Alternate  ) 

( Continued  on  page  2  ) 


©    Copyright  1982 
INDIAN  STANDARDS  INSTITUTION 

This  publication  is  protected  under  the  Indian  Copyright  Act  ( XIV  of  1957 )  and 
reproduction  in  whole  or  in  part  by  any  means  except  with  written  permission  of  the 
publisher  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an  infringement  of  copyright  under  the  said  Act. 


IS  :  10017  -  1981 

( Continued  from  page  1  ) 

Members  Representing 

Dr  S.  B.  Singh  Public    Analyst,    Government    of    Uttar    Pradesh, 

Lucknow 
Shri  K.  N.  Sircar  The  Consultative  Committee  of  Plantation  Associa- 

tion, Calcutta 
Dr  G.  S.  Venkata  Ram  United    Planter's    Association    of   Southern    India, 

Coonoor 
Shri  V.  Ranganathan  ( Alternate ) 
Shri  S.  Vishveshwara  Central    Coffee    Research    Institute,    Chikmagalur 

Shri  R.  Walter  Food  Specialities  Ltd,  Moga 

Shri  A.  K.  Roy  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  T.  Purnanandam,  Director  General,  ISI  (  Ex-ojficio  Member ) 

Director  (  Agri  &  Food  )  (  Secretary  ) 


Cocoa  and  Its  Products  Subcommittee,  AFDC  39  :  3 

Convener 

Shri  V.  H.  Shah  Kaira  District  Go-operative  Milk  Producers'  Union 

Limited,  Anand 

Members 

Shri  Kailash  Vyas  (  Alternate  to 
Shri  V.  H.  Shah  ) 
Dr  C.  K.  George  Directorate  of  Cocoa,  Arecanut  and  Spices  Develop- 

ment, Calicut 
Shri  S.  Kasturi  Government  Analyst   Laboratory,   Madras 

Col  R.  K.  Kochhar  Quartermaster  General's  Branch,  Army  Headquarters 

New  Delhi 
Lt-Col  P.  J.  Cherian  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  G.  P.  Natarajan  Central     Food     Technological     Research     Institute 

(  CSIR  ),  Mysore 
Shri  N.  G.  Gopalakrishana  Rao  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  M.  N.  Nayar  Central  Plantation  Crop  Research  Institute  ( ICAR  ), 

Kasaragod 
Shri  T.  A.  Sriram  ( Alternate  ) 
Shri  G.  Y.  Pal  Gadbury  India  Limited,  Bombay 

Shri  S.  J.  Kekobad  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  M.  G.  Pothen  Amalgamated  Malabar  Estates  Private  Ltd,  Calicut 

Shri  M.  G.  Sathe  The   Sathe   Biscuit   and   Chocolate   Company   Ltd, 

Pune 
Shri  J.  S.  Sunder  Raj  Agriculture    Department,    Government    of    Tamil 

Nadu,  Madras 
Shri  N.   Sadasivam   (Alternate) 


IS  :  10017  -  1981 

Indian  Standard 

CODE  OF  PRACTICE  FOR  CONSTRUCTION  OF 
COCOA  BEANS  STORAGE  STRUCTURES 

0.    FOREWORD 

0.1  This  Indian  Standard  was  adopted  by  the  Indian  Standards  Institution 
on  12  December  1981,  after  the  draft  finalized  by  the  Stimulant  Foods 
Sectional  Committee,  had  been  approved  by  the  Agricultural  and  Food 
Products  Division  Council. 

0.2  The  damage  to  cocoa  beans  due  to  fungal,  microbial  and  insect  attacks 
can  be  minimized  to  a  large  extent  if  cocoa  beans  are  stored  in  structures 
which  prevent  as  far  as  practicable,  their  entry  inside  and  also  if  suitable 
measures  are  taken  during  handling,  transport  and  storage. 

0.3  The  damage  and  pollution  of  cocoa  beans  during  storage  are  due  to 
temperature,  moisture  and  dampness,  insects  and  rodents.  It  is,  therefore, 
obvious  that  in  order  to  conserve  cocoa  beans  they  should  be  stored  in 
sound  structures  of  different  types,  each  type  being  suitable  for  a  particular 
region  in  the  country  and  code  of  practice  should  be  formulated  and 
adopted  for  handling,  transporting  and  storing;  when  such  standards 
become  available  and  are  implemented,  they  will  go  a  long  way  in  mini- 
mising the  loss  of  cocoa  beans. 

0.4  This  standard  has  been  formulated  mainly  with  a  view  to  guiding 
processors,  dealers  and  other  agencies  connected  with  handling  of  cocoa 
beans  so  that  the  damage  to  cocoa  beans  is,  as  far  as  possible,  reduced  to 
the  minimum. 

0.5  This  code  has  been  prepared  for  the  construction  of  structures  which 
would  permit  effective  control  of  insect  and  other  pests  of  stored  cocoa 
beans  and  which  entirely  exclude  rain  and  ground  moisture. 


1.  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  covers  requirements  and  method  for  construction  of 
cocoa  beans  bag  storage  type  structures. 

2.  TERMINOLOGY 

2.0  For  the  purpose  of  this  standard,  the  following  definitions  shall  apply. 

3 


IS  :  10017  -  1981 

2.1  Bag  —  A  container  made  either  of  jute,  fabric  or  laminates  having 
the  standard  dimensions  and  containing  a  net  content  of  60  to  65  kg  of  dry 
cocoa  beans. 

2*2  Bag  Storage  Structure  —  Structure  in  which  bags  containing  cocoa 
beans  are  stored. 

3.  LOCATION 

3.1  The  cocoa  beans  bag  storage  structure  shall  be  located  on  a  raised 
and  well-drained  site,  or  on  suitably  made-up  soils,  if  necessary. 

3.2  The  structure  shall  not  be  located  on  lands  subjected  to  floods  or 
inundations  and  shall  be  safe  from  damage  by  surface  or  seepage  water. 

3.3  The  structure  shall  be  at  least  15  m  away  from  residential  buildings, 
factories  (  other  than  cocoa  processing  factories ) ,  dairies,  poultry  farms, 
kilns  and  other  possible  sources  of  fire  and  30  m  away  from  garbage,  dump- 
ing grounds,  slaughter  houses,  hide  curing  centres,  tanneries  and  such 
other  places,  the  close  vicinity  of  which  is  deleterious  to  safe  storage  of 
cocoa  beans. 

3.4  The  structure  shall  be  away  from  large  trees. 

3.5  The  structure  shall  be  generally  accessible  to  lorries  and  preferably 
situated  near  a  rail  head  with  goods  siding. 

3.5.1  Where  the  structure  is  near  waterways,  such  as  ferry  heads  and 
docks  sufficient  berthing,  loading  and  unloading  facilities  shall  be  made 
available. 

4.  BAG  STORAGE  STRUCTURES 

4.1  The  bag  storage  structure  may  be  of  dimensions  most  economically 
suited  to  the  land  available.  The  storage  capacity  shall  be  calculated 
taking  into  account  the  coefficient  factor  of  0*8m2  per  metric  tonne  of 
cured  cocoa  seeds. 

Note  1  —  The  coefficient  factor  is  derived  from  (a)  14  bags  stacked  one  over  the 
other;  (b)  each  such  bag  containing  62*5  kg  of  cocoa  beans;  (c)  30  percent  floor  area 
for  passage,  in  between  the  stacks;  and  (d)  stacks  of  30  bags. 

Note  2  —  The  minimum  height  of  the  wall  may  be  5'5  m  for  flat  roofed  structures 
and  in  the  case  of  other  structures  the  minimum  wall  height  may  be  4*25  m  inside 
at  the  point  where  the  roof  crosses  the  wall. 


IS  :  10017  -  1981 

5.  FOUNDATION 

5.1  The  foundation  shall  be  carried  to  a  depth  of  not  less  than  one  metre 
unless  rock,  sheet-rock  or  laterite  is  met  with  at  a  higher  level  and  shall 
have  concrete  bedding  of  suitable  thickness  unless  rock,  sheet-rock  or 
laterite  is  met  with. 

5.2  The  foundation  masonry  shall  be  of  stone  burnt  bricks*  concrete  blocks 
or  other  suitable  materials  depending  upon  the  availability  of  the  same 
at  a  particular  region.  It  shall  be  constructed  either  in  lime  mortar  1  :  3 
(  1  part  lime  and  3  parts  of  sand )  or  cement  mortar  of  proportion  not 
less  than  1  :  5. 

5.3  The  foundation  trenches  on  both  sides  shall  be  filled  with  coarse  sand 
or  gritty  material  and  shall  be  flush  with  ground  level. 

5.4  Necessary  measures  shall  be  taken  to  make  the  structure  termite-proof. 

6.  PLINTH 

6.1  The  plinth  level  shall  be  at  a  minimum  height  of  0'7  m  from  the  sur- 
rounding ground  level. 

6.2  The  plinth  shall  be  filled  up  as  given  under  7.1. 

6.3  The  plinth  (  or  basement )  masonry  shall  be  of  stone  in  cement  mortar 
of  proportion  not  less  than  1*5  and  cement  pointed  1  :  4  or  plastered  on  its 
outer  surface  with  cement  plaster  not  less  than  1  :  6. 

6.4  75  mm  thick  stone  slab  or  1  :  2  :  4  cement  concrete  plinth  slab  over  the 
plinth  masonry  and  below  superstructure  shall  be  laid. 

7.  FLOOR 

7.1  Filling  of  Plinth  or  Basement  —  Fill  with  gritty  moorum  soil  or 
red  earth,  sand  or  coal  clinker.  The  layers  should  be  of  75  mm  up  to  a 
height  of  150  mm  in  case  of  cement  concrete  floor  or  225  mm  in  case  of 
granite  or  any  other  good  stone  slabs  floor,  below  the  plinth  level.  Water 
profusely  and  compact  each  of  these  layers.  Lay  over  these  a  layer  of  coarse 
sand  and  stone.  Water  and  compact  these  layers  of  coarse  sand  and  rubble 
stone  and  again  compact  these  layers  thoroughly. 


IS  :  10017  -  1981 

7.2  Laying  of  the  Floor  —  It  shall  be  of  either  cement  concrete,  granite 
stone  or  any  other  good  quality  stone  slabs.  If  the  floor  is  of  cement  concrete 
it  shall  be  75  mm  thick  (  25  mm  thick  1  :  2  :  4  of  20  mm  metal  over  50  mm 
of  1  :  4  :  8  of  40  mm  metal )  and  shall  be  laid  in  alternate  panels,  not 
exceeding  2'5  m2.  The  joints  of  panels  shall  be  neatly  grouted  with  cement 
mortar  1:3.  If  the  floor  is  of  stone  slabs,  a  layer  of  lime  concrete  or 
cement  concrete  1  :  4  :  8  of  38  mm  metal  eof  not  less  than  75  mm  thickness 
shall  be  laid  over  the  150  mm  layer  of  rubble  stone,  over  which  the  stone 
slabs  shall  be  set  in  lime  mortar  1  :  3  or  cement  mortar  1  : 4.  The  stone 
slabs  shall  not  be  less  than  50  mm  in  thickness  and  shall  be  pointed  with 
cement  1  :  3. 

8.  WALLS 

8.1  The  walls  shall  be  solid  and  shall  be  at  least  300  mm  thick  in  the  case 
of  brick  construction.  In  the  case  of  laterite  or  other  hard  stone  construction, 
the  thickness  of  the  wall  shall  be  450  mm  up  to  a  height  of  3  m  from  the 
plinth  and  225  mm  thick  from  this  height  upwards.  In  the  case  of  brick 
construction  the  walls  shall  be  plastered  with  lime  mortar  1  :  2  or  cement 
mortar  1  :  4  and  shall  be  finished  smooth.  In  case  of  laterite  or  stone  cons- 
truction, cement  mortar  of  1  :  3  to  1  :  4  shall  be  used  for  pointing  purpose. 
There  shall  be  no  off-sets  or  projections  in  the  wall.  The  wall  shall  be  flush 
with  the  outer  surface  of  the  plinth;  in  case  this  is  not  possible,  the  plinth 
projections  shall  be  rounded  off. 

9.  DOOR 

9.1  The  door  opening  shall  be  not  less  than  2  m  wide  and  2*5  m  high. 
The  door  leaves  shall  be  of  steel  or  timber  and  either  rolling  type  or  opening 
outside.  When  open,  the  door  leaves  shall  flush  with  the  outside  surface 
of  wall.  When  closed,  they  shall  be  close  filling  with  the  frame  of  the  door. 
The  door  leaves  shall  not  have  cracks  or  open  joints. 

10.  AIR  VENTS 

10.1  Air  vents  shall  be  provided  at  floor  level  for  the  ingress  of  fresh  air. 
Windows  shall  not  be  provided. 

10.2  The  clear  opening  of  the  air  vents  should  not  be  more  than  25  cm2, 
and  shall  be  provided  with  shutters  opening  inside.  When  the  godown 
abuts  the  road  and  safety  considerations  preclude  the  erection  of  air  vents 
in  the  outer  wall,  they  may  be  provided  in  the  inner  wall. 

10.3  For  every  5  m  length  of  wall,  there  shall  be  one  air  vent. 


IS  t  10017  -  1981 

11.  VENTILATORS 

11.1  For  every  6  m  length  of  the  wall,  one  ventilator  of  the  size  0*7  m  high 
and  1*2  m  wide  shall  be  provided.  A  centrally  rotating  shutter  shall  be 
provided  to  the  ventilator  and  the  shutter  shall  be  close  fitting  with  the 
frame  of  the  ventilator.  The  frame  of  the  ventilator  shall  be  fixed  flush 
with  the  inside  face  of  the  wall. 

11.2  The  ventilator  shall  be  protected  by  glazed  sun  shades  and  frame 
work  of  expanded  metal  or  wire  mesh. 

12.  ROOF 

12.1  The  roof  may  be  either  of  reinforced  concrete  flat,  or  shell  roof,  a 
sloping  roof  with  asbestos  cement  sheets  or  Mangalore  tiles,  if  the  former 
is  not  available.  The  sloping  roof  shall  be  a  single-span  or  two-span  structure 
with  a  central  longitudinal  gutter  which  is  a  source  of  leakage.  Galvanized 
steel  sheets  shall  not  be  used. 

12.1.1  The  leaves  of  the  roof  shall  project  at  least  0-7  m  from  the  outer 
surface  of  the  wails.  The  purlins  and  sheets  shall  be  well  anchored  and 
secured. 

13.  DRAINAGE 

13.1  Gutter  and  drain  pipes  shall  be  provided  with  the  required  dimensions 
taking  into  consideration  the  intensity  of  rainfall  and  the  projected  area 
of  the  roofing. 

13*2  A  stone  or  concrete  slab  of  suitable  dimensions  shall  be  provided  on 
the  ground  below  each  drain  pipe  so  that  the  ground  is  not  secured  due 
to  the  water  falling  from  the  drain  pipe.  The  drain  pipe  shall  be  located 
in  such  a  way  that  it  shall  not  obstruct  the  ventilators. 

13*3  All  round  the  structure,  abutting  the  plinth  a  pavement  0*5  m  wide 
and  1 50  mm  thick  of  lime  concrete  or  cement  concrete  1  :  3  :  6  or  rubble 
stone  pitching  set  in  cement  mortar  1  :  4  shall  be  constructed  with  suitable 
drainage  arrangement.  The  pavement  shall  slope  outside  at  1  in  1 0. 

14.  UNDERGROUND  DRAINAGE  —  BY  RUBBLE  DRAIN 

14.1  Where  ground  water  is  likely  to  rise  during  the  rainy  season  above 
the  lowest  level  of  the  foundation,  a  trench  0*7  m  wide  shall  be  constructed 
all  round  the  structure. 


IS  :  10017  -  1981 

14.2  The  trench  shall  be  one  metre  away  from  the  outer  periphery  of  the 
structure,  and  shall  be  at  the  lowest  level  of  the  foundation  with  a  longi- 
tudinal bed  slope  towards  the  natural  fall  of  the  ground.  It  shall  be  con- 
nected to  an  outfall  drain  for  ultimate  disposal  of  the  water.  It  shall  be 
filled  with  rubble  or  brick  bats  or  graded  jelly  to  a  depth  of  0*7  m  and  the 
rest  with  earth,  and  then  levelled* 

14.3  The  rubble  filling  of  drain  should  be  so  arranged  as  to  have  the  effect 
of  an  inverted  filter,  that  is,  bigger  rubble  should  be  put  at  the  bottom  and 
the  size  of  rubble,  brick  bat  or  jelly  to  be  reduced  gradually. 

Note  —  The  requirements  given  under  14  above  depend  upon  locality  and  site 
conditions  may  and  not  be  insisted  upon  in  the  case  of  inland  region  with  rainfall 
of  less  than  750  mm.  In  coastal  and  heavy  rainfall  regions  these  are  necessary,  where 
the  soil  conditions  require. 


